The State Education Department
The University of the State of New York

New York State
K-12
Social Studies
Framework

Introduction

Revised November 2014

Contents
Introduction ........................................................................................................................................... 2
Overview ............................................................................................................................................ 2
New York State Common Core Learning Standards for English Language Arts and Literacy in
History/Social Studies, Science, and Technical Subjects........................................................................ 4
College and Career Readiness Anchor Standards for Reading .......................................................... 4
College and Career Readiness Anchor Standards for Writing ........................................................... 5
College and Career Readiness Anchor Standards for Speaking and Listening................................... 5
The C3 Framework and the Inquiry Arc ................................................................................................. 7
Key Components .................................................................................................................................... 8
Unifying Themes .............................................................................................................................. 10
Themes at a Glance...................................................................................................................... 10
Themes with Context ................................................................................................................... 11
Content Sequence................................................................................................................................ 12
How to Read the Social Studies Framework ........................................................................................ 13
Vertical Articulation and Progression of Social Studies Practices........................................................ 14
Reading Standards for Literacy in History/Social Studies 5-12............................................................ 22
Writing Standards for Literacy in History/Social Studies ..................................................................... 24
Reference Documents.......................................................................................................................... 28

Introduction

Page 1

Introduction
Social Studies is intended to promote civic competence through the integrated study of the
social sciences and humanities. Within the school program, Social Studies provides coordinated,
systematic study that draws upon such disciplines as anthropology, archaeology, economics,
geography, history, law, philosophy, political science, psychology, religion, belief systems, and
sociology, as well as upon appropriate content from the humanities, mathematics, and natural
sciences. The primary purpose of Social Studies is to help young people develop the ability to
make informed and reasoned decisions for the public good as citizens of a culturally diverse,
democratic society in an interdependent world (adapted from the National Council for the
Social Studies [NCSS] definition of Social Studies).
The Social Studies Framework allows for:
•

•
•
•

Students to develop an understanding of concepts and key ideas through inquiry,
analysis of primary and secondary source documents, and disciplinary skills and
practices.
Students to be assessed on their understanding of key ideas and conceptual
understandings as well as Social Studies practices.
Students to be instructed across the K-12 spectrum by using a cohesive set of
themes, key ideas, and concepts.
Districts and teachers to continue to have decision-making power about how to
teach and illustrate key ideas and conceptual understandings to promote student
understanding.

Overview

New York State K-12 Social Studies Framework (“NYS Framework”) is anchored in the New
York State Common Core Standards for Literacy and Writing and New York State Learning
Standards for Social Studies. These standards serve as a consistent set of expectations for what
students should learn and be able to do, so that we can ensure that every student across New
York State is prepared to be an active and engaged citizen who is ready to pursue college or a
career.
•
•
•
•
•

This document fuses the New York State Learning Standards, Key Ideas, and Conceptual
Understandings and content sequence into a single document. The course sequence is
similar to that of the previous Social Studies Resource Guide with Core Curriculum.
Unifying Themes based primarily on the National Council for the Social Studies themes
serve to unify ideas and concepts across all grade levels.
The Common Core Literacy Skills and Social Studies Practices include the skills and
habits of mind that should be developed and fostered, using the content for each grade.
Key Ideas and Conceptual Understandings for each grade level with supporting
Content Specifications are incorporated.
The College, Career and Civic Life Framework, notably the Inquiry Arc, is referenced as a
curriculum development resource.

Introduction

Page 2

New York State Learning Standards for Social Studies
The five learning standards, adopted by the Board of Regents in 1996, continue to provide the
overall foundation for the NYS Framework. Each Key Idea is derived from and/or aligned to one
of these standards as the primary standard. In many cases, a Key Idea represents more than one
standard.
Standard 1: History of the United States and New York

Students will use a variety of intellectual skills to demonstrate their understanding
of major ideas, eras, themes, developments, and turning points in the history of the
United States and New York.

Standard 2: World History

Students will use a variety of intellectual skills to demonstrate their understanding
of major ideas, eras, themes, developments, and turning points in world history and
examine the broad sweep of history from a variety of perspectives.

Standard 3: Geography

Students will use a variety of intellectual skills to demonstrate their understanding
of the geography of the interdependent world in which we live—local, national, and
global—including the distribution of people, places, and environments over Earth’s
surface.

Standard 4: Economics

Students will use a variety of intellectual skills to demonstrate their understanding
of how the United States and other societies develop economic systems and
associated institutions to allocate scarce resources, how major decision-making
units function in the United States and other national economies, and how an
economy solves the scarcity problem through market and nonmarket mechanisms.

Standard 5: Civics, Citizenship, and Government

Students will use a variety of intellectual skills to demonstrate their understanding
of the necessity for establishing governments; the governmental systems of the
United States and other nations; the United States Constitution; the basic civic
values of American constitutional democracy; and the roles, rights, and
responsibilities of citizenship, including avenues of participation.

Introduction

Page 3

New York State Common Core Learning Standards for English
Language Arts and Literacy in History/Social Studies, Science, and
Technical Subjects
College and Career Readiness Anchor Standards for Reading
Key Ideas and Details
1. Read closely to determine what the text says explicitly and to make logical inferences
from it, and cite specific textual evidence when writing or speaking to support
conclusions drawn from the text.
2. Determine central ideas or themes of a text, analyze their development, and summarize
the key supporting details and ideas.
3. Analyze how and why individuals, events, or ideas develop and interact over the course
of a text.
Craft and Structure

4. Interpret words and phrases as they are used in a text, including determining technical,
connotative, and figurative meanings, and analyze how specific word choices shape
meaning or tone.
5. Analyze the structure of texts, including how specific sentences, paragraphs, and larger
portions of the text (e.g., a section, chapter, scene, or stanza) relate to each other and the
whole.
6. Assess how point of view or purpose shapes the content and style of a text.
Integration of Knowledge and Ideas

7. Integrate and evaluate content presented in diverse formats and media, including
visually and quantitatively, as well as in words.
8. Delineate and evaluate the argument and specific claims in a text, including the validity
of the reasoning and the relevance and sufficiency of the evidence.
9. Analyze how two or more texts address similar themes or topics to build knowledge or
to compare the approaches the authors take.
Range of Reading and Level of Text Complexity

10. Read and comprehend complex literary and informational texts independently and
proficiently.

Introduction

Page 4

College and Career Readiness Anchor Standards for Writing
Text Types and Purposes
1. Write arguments to support claims in an analysis of substantive topics or texts, using
valid reasoning and relevant and sufficient evidence.
2. Write informative/explanatory texts to examine and convey complex ideas and
information clearly and accurately through the effective selection, organization, and
analysis of content.
3. Write narratives to develop real or imagined experiences or events, using effective
technique, well-chosen details, and well-structured event sequences.

Production and Distribution of Writing

4. Produce clear and coherent writing in which the development, organization, and style
are appropriate to task, purpose, and audience.
5. Develop and strengthen writing as needed by planning, revising, editing, rewriting, or
trying a new approach.
6. Use technology, including the Internet, to produce and publish writing and to interact
and collaborate with others.

Research to Build and Present Knowledge

7. Conduct short as well as more sustained research projects based on focused questions,
demonstrating understanding of the subject under investigation.
8. Gather relevant information from multiple print and digital sources, assess the
credibility and accuracy of each source, and integrate the information while avoiding
plagiarism.
9. Draw evidence from literary or informational texts to support analysis, reflection, and
research.

Range of Writing

10. Write routinely over extended time frames (time for research, reflection, and revision)
and shorter time frames (a single sitting or a day or two) for a range of tasks, purposes,
and audiences.

College and Career Readiness Anchor Standards for Speaking and Listening
Comprehension and Collaboration
1. Prepare for and participate effectively in a range of conversations and collaborations
with diverse partners, building on others’ ideas and expressing their own clearly and
persuasively.
2. Integrate and evaluate information presented in diverse media and formats, including
visually, quantitatively, and orally.
3. Evaluate a speaker’s point of view, reasoning, and use of evidence and rhetoric.
Introduction

Page 5

Presentation of Knowledge and Ideas
4. Present information, findings, and supporting evidence such that listeners can follow
the line of reasoning, and the organization, development, and style are appropriate to
task, purpose, and audience,
5. Make strategic use of digital media and visual displays of data to express information
and enhance understandings of presentations.
6. Adapt speech to a variety of contexts and communicative tasks, demonstrating
command of formal English when indicated or appropriate.

Introduction

Page 6

The C3 Framework and the Inquiry Arc
The College, Career, and Civic Life (C3) Framework for State Standards in Social Studies was
published by the National Council for the Social Studies in September 2013. The C3 Framework
has three foundations: the Inquiry Arc, Disciplinary Literacy, and Civic Life. The C3 Framework
and NYS Framework both emphasize the foundation of literacy through an integration of the
Common Core Learning Standards and through unique disciplinary literacies of Social Studies in
civics, economics, geography, and history. The Civic Life foundation is a cornerstone of the NYS
Framework beginning in Kindergarten and culminating in the commencement-level course
Participation in Government.
The Inquiry Arc is integrated into the NYS Framework. The C3 is built on the foundation of an
inquiry arc, “a set of interlocking and mutually reinforcing ideas that feature the four
Dimensions of informed inquiry in social studies:
(1) Developing questions and planning inquiries;
(2) Applying disciplinary concepts and tools;
(3) Evaluating sources and using evidence; and
(4) Communicating conclusions and taking informed action” (p17).

Each of these four Dimensions aligns to the priorities of the NYS Framework. The emphasis in
Dimensions 2 and 3 mirrors the focus on skills in general and the vertical articulation of Social
Studies practices in particular. The C3 framework also can provide guidance related to
questioning as a part of the curriculum design. The document notes, “Questioning is key to
student learning. The C3 Framework encourages the use of compelling and supporting
questions, both teacher- and student-generated, as a central element of the teaching and
learning process” (p17).
The following graphic illustrates how the components of the NYS Framework are integrated
with the Inquiry Arc.

Introduction

Page 7

Key Components






Grade-level Key Ideas, Conceptual Understandings, and Content Specifications
K-12 Social Studies Practices
K-12 Common Core Literacy Skills
K-12 Unifying Themes
Inquiry Arc

These components work interdependently in both instruction and assessment. Through an
inquiry-based approach, students develop thematic and conceptual understanding while
applying disciplinary practices and literacy skills in the context of content.

Introduction

Page 8

Key Ideas
Key Ideas are aligned to the standards and represent enduring understandings that should be
the focus of teaching and learning for each grade. Key Ideas are designed to address larger
social studies perspectives, trends, and issues. Each grade level consists of eight to twelve Key
Ideas, so these statements are intentionally rich and substantial.
Conceptual Understandings

Conceptual Understandings are more specific statements that are designed to support each Key
Idea. Each Key Idea consists of approximately two to seven Conceptual Understandings that are
designed to support the larger Key Idea. Together, the Key Ideas and Conceptual
Understandings represent the body of Social Studies concepts that should be the focus of
teaching and learning.
Content Specifications

Content Specifications, crafted as “Students will…” statements, add further clarity and depth to
the Conceptual Understanding by articulating specific content that can be taught to illuminate
the Conceptual Understanding. Ultimately, Content Specifications work in tandem with
Conceptual Understandings in support of the larger Key Ideas.
Social Studies Practices

The Social Studies Practices represent the social science and historical thinking skills that
students should develop throughout their K-12 education in order to be prepared for civic
participation, college, and careers. Similar to the Mathematical Practices within the Common
Core Learning Standards, the Social Studies Practices should be infused with the Social Studies
content contained within the Key Ideas and Conceptual Understandings. The Practices were
created based on the existing New York State Social Studies Learning Standards, the National
Geography Standards, the historical thinking skills articulated within the new Advanced
Placement World History Curriculum Framework, the Disciplinary Tools of Dimension 2 of the
C3 Framework, National Council for the Social Studies Standards, and Habits of the Mind
published by the National Council for History Education.
1) Gathering, Interpreting and Using Evidence
2) Chronological Reasoning and Causation
3) Comparison and Contextualization
4) Geographic Reasoning
5) Economics and Economic Systems
6) Civic Participation

Introduction

Page 9

NYS Common Core Literacy Skills
The Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) outline standards for literacy with individual
grade levels to provide specificity. Grades 6-12 have distinct standards for literacy and writing
in history/social studies, using the following grade bands: 6-8, 9-10, and 11-12. In order to
match the structure of the NYS Framework, the CCLS and Social Studies Practices required a 58, 9-10, and 11-12 articulation of skills, so language was synthesized to match these grade
bands (i.e., the addition of grade 5* to the 6-8 band). In this case, teachers are asked to use their
best judgment about which CCLS should be applied at grade 5 in order to prepare students for
the requirements and demands of grade 6.

Unifying Themes

These ten unifying Social Studies themes represent different lenses that can be applied to the
teaching and learning of the Key Ideas and Conceptual Understandings within the NYS
Framework across all grades, K-12.
Themes at a Glance

1. Individual Development and Cultural Identity
2. Development, Movement, and Interaction of Cultures
3. Time, Continuity, and Change
4. Geography, Humans, and the Environment
5. Development and Transformation of Social Structures
6. Power, Authority, and Governance
7. Civic Ideals and Practices
8. Creation, Expansion, and Interaction of Economic Systems
9. Science, Technology, and Innovation
10. Global Connections and Exchange

Introduction

Page 10

Themes with Context
1. Individual Development and Cultural Identity
 Role of social, political, and cultural interactions in the development of identity
 Personal identity as a function of an individual’s culture, time, place, geography,
interaction with groups, influences from institutions, and lived experiences

2. Development, Movement, and Interaction of Cultures
 Role of diversity within and among cultures
 Aspects of culture such as belief systems, religious faith, or political ideals as
influences on other parts of a culture, such as its institutions or literature, music,
and art
 Cultural diffusion and change over time as facilitating different ideas and beliefs
3. Time, Continuity, and Change
 History as a formal study that applies research methods
 Reading, reconstructing, and interpreting events
 Analyzing causes and consequences of events and developments
 Considering competing interpretations of events

4. Geography, Humans, and the Environment
 Relationship between human populations and the physical world (people,
places, and environments)
 Effect of human activities on the environment
 Interactions between regions, locations, places, people, and environments
 Spatial patterns of place and location

5. Development and Transformation of Social Structures
 Role of social class, systems of stratification, social groups, and institutions
 Role of gender, race, ethnicity, education, class, age, and religion in defining
social structures within a culture
 Social and political inequalities
 Expansion and access of rights through concepts of justice and human rights

6. Power, Authority, and Governance
 Purposes, characteristics, and functions of various governance systems as they
are practiced
 Individual rights and responsibilities as protected and challenged within the
context of majority rule
 Fundamental principles and values of constitutional democracy
 Origins, uses, and abuses of power
 Conflict, diplomacy, and war

7. Civic Ideals and Practices
 Basic freedoms and rights and responsibilities of citizens in a democratic
republic
 Role of the citizen in the community and nation and as a member of the global
community
 Civic participation and engagement
 Respect for diversity

Introduction

Page 11




Civic ideals and practices in countries other than our democratic republic
Struggle for rights, access to citizenship rights, and universal human rights

8. Creation, Expansion, and Interaction of Economic Systems
 Production, distribution, and consumption
 Scarcity of resources and the challenges of meeting wants and needs
 Supply/demand and the coordination of individual choices
 Economic systems
 Trade, interdependence, and globalization
 Role of government in the economy
 Personal finance

9. Science, Technology, and Innovation
 Scientific and intellectual theories, findings, discoveries, and philosophies
 Applications of science and innovations in transportation, communication,
military technology, navigation, agriculture, and industrialization
 Relationship between science, technology, and innovation and social, cultural,
and economic change

10. Global Connections and Exchange
 Past, current, and likely future global connections and interactions
 Cultural diffusion; the spread of ideas, beliefs, technology, and goods
 Role of technology
 Benefits/consequences of global interdependence (social, political, economic)
 Causes and patterns of migration
 Tension between national interests and global priorities
Grade

Content Sequence

Content Focus

Kindergarten

Self and Others

Grade 1

My Family and Other Families, Now and Long Ago

Grade 2

My Community and Other United States Communities

Grade 3

Communities around the World

Grade 4

Local History and Local Government

Grade 5

The Western Hemisphere

Grade 6

The Eastern Hemisphere

Grade 7

History of the United States and New York – I

Grade 8

History of the United States and New York – II

Grade 9

Global History and Geography – I

Grade 10

Global History and Geography – II

Grade 11

United States History and Government

Grade 12

Participation in Government
Economics, the Enterprise System, and Finance

Introduction

Page 12

How to Read the Social Studies Framework
The Key Ideas are
the central
organizing feature
for each grade. Key
Ideas represent the
essential and
enduring
understandings that
should be the focus
of teaching and
learning for each
grade.

Content Specifications
identify particular social
studies content that
helps to illuminate the
conceptual
understandings,
providing examples
within the context of
“Student will. . .”
statements in order to
suggest broad
instructional activities.

6.5 Comparative Classical Civilizations in the Eastern
Hemisphere (ca. 600 B.C.E. – ca. 600 C.E.)
As complex societies and civilizations change over
time, the political and economic structures evolve. A
golden age may be indicated when there is an
extended period of time that is peaceful, prosperous,
and demonstrates great cultural achievements.
(Standards: 2, 3, 5; Themes: ID, TCC, GEO, SOC, GOV,
CIV)*
6.5a Geographic factors influenced the development
of classical civilizations and their political structures.
 Students will locate the classical
civilizations on a map and identify
geographic factors that influenced the
extent of their boundaries; locate their
cities on a map and identify their political
structures.
 Students will compare and contrast the
similarities and differences of the Chinese
(Qin, Han) and Greco-Roman classical
civilizations by examining religion, job
specialization, cities, government,
language/record keeping system,
technology, and social hierarchy.

*After each key idea, the corresponding Social Studies Standard(s) and the
Unifying Theme(s) appear.
1. Individual Development and Cultural Identity (ID)
2. Development, Movement, and Interaction of Cultures (MOV)
3. Time, Continuity, and Change (TCC)
4. Geography, Humans, and the Environment (GEO)
5. Development and Transformation of Social Structures (SOC)
6. Power, Authority, and Governance (GOV)
7. Civic Ideals and Practices (CIV)
8. Creation, Expansion, and Interaction of Economic Systems (ECO)
9. Science, Technology, and Innovation (TECH)
10. Global Connections and Exchange (EXCH)

13

Conceptual
Understandings
are more specific
statements that
support each Key
Idea. Conceptual
Understandings
scaffold toward
robust
understanding of
the key idea.

Vertical Articulation and Progression of Social Studies Practices
Social Studies
Practices
Gathering,
Interpreting and
Using Evidence

Grades K-4

Grades 5-8

Grades 9-12

Develop questions about
the world in which we live
that can be answered by
gathering, interpreting and
using evidence.

Define and frame questions
about events and the world
in which we live, and use
evidence to answer these
questions.

Recognize, analyze and use
different forms of evidence
used to make meaning in
Social Studies (including
primary and secondary
sources such as art and
photographs, artifacts, oral
histories, maps, and
graphs).

Identify, describe, and
evaluate evidence about
events from diverse sources
(including written
documents, works of art,
photographs, charts and
graphs, artifacts, oral
histories, and other primary
and secondary sources).

Develop and frame
questions about events and
the world in which we live,
form hypotheses as
potential answers to these
questions, use evidence to
answer these questions,
and consider and analyze
counter-hypotheses.

Identify and explain
creation/authorship,
purpose, and format for
evidence. Where
appropriate, identify point
of view and bias.

Analyze evidence in terms
of content,
authorship/creation, point
of view, purpose, and
format; identify bias;
explain the role of bias and
audience in presenting
arguments or evidence.

Identify arguments or
opinions of others with
support.

Identify where the author
has stated fact versus
provided an opportunity to
draw inference;
understand the role of
drawing inference from a
text to support an opinion.

14

Describe and analyze
arguments of others.

Identify, describe, and
evaluate evidence about
events from diverse
sources (including written
documents, works of art,
photographs, charts and
graphs, artifacts, oral
histories, and other
primary and secondary
sources).

Analyze evidence in terms
of content,
authorship/creation, point
of view, bias, purpose,
format, and audience.

Describe, analyze, and
evaluate arguments of
others.

Vertical Articulation and Progression of Social Studies Practices
Social Studies
Practices
Gathering,
Interpreting, and
Using Evidence

Chronological
Reasoning and
Causation

Grades K-4

Grades 5-8

Grades 9-12

Recognize arguments and
identify evidence.

Recognize an argument and
identify evidence that
supports the argument;
examine arguments that are
related to a specific social
studies topic from multiple
perspectives; deconstruct
arguments, recognizing the
perspective of the argument
and identifying evidence
used to support that
perspective.

Deconstruct and construct
plausible and persuasive
arguments using evidence.

Create understanding of
the past by using and
analyzing primary and
secondary sources.

Create meaningful and
persuasive understandings
of the past by fusing
disparate and relevant
evidence from primary and
secondary sources.

Create meaningful and
persuasive understandings
of the past by synthesizing
disparate and relevant
evidence from primary and
secondary sources and
drawing connections to the
present.

Explain how events are
related chronologically to
one another in time.

Articulate how events are
related chronologically to
one another in time and
explain the ways in which
earlier ideas and events
may influence subsequent
ideas and events.

Articulate how events are
related chronologically to
one another in time and
explain the ways in which
earlier ideas and events
may influence subsequent
ideas and events.

Employ mathematical
skills to measure time in
years and centuries.
Understand the difference
between BCE and CE.
Identify the chronological
significance of data
presented in time lines
with teacher support.

15

Employ mathematical skills
to measure time by years,
decades, centuries, and
millennia; to calculate time
from the fixed points of the
calendar system (BC or BCE
and AD or CE); and to
interpret the data presented
in time lines.

Employ mathematical
skills to measure time by
years, decades, centuries,
and millennia; to calculate
time from the fixed points
of the calendar system (BC
or BCE and AD or CE); and
to interpret the data
presented in time lines.

Vertical Articulation and Progression of Social Studies Practices
Social Studies
Practices
Chronological
Reasoning and
Causation

Grades K-4

Grades 5-8

Grades 9-12

Identify causes and effects,
using examples from
his/her life and from a
current event or history.

Identify causes and effects,
using examples from
current events, grade-level
content, and historical
events.

Identify causes and effects,
using examples from
different time periods and
courses of study across
several grade levels.

Distinguish between longterm and immediate causes
and effects of an event from
current events or history.

Distinguish between longterm and immediate
causes and multiple effects
of an event from current
events or history.

Identify the relationship
between multiple causes
and multiple effects.
Distinguish between longterm and immediate
causes and effects of an
event from current events
or history.

Identify, analyze, and
evaluate the relationship
between multiple causes
and effects.

Recognize dynamics of
historical continuity and
change over periods of
time.

Recognize, analyze, and
evaluate dynamics of
historical continuity and
change over periods of time.

Use periods of time such as
decades and centuries to
put events into
chronological order;
organize historical events
on a timeline.

Recognize that changing the
periodization affects the
historical narrative.

Recognize and identify
patterns of continuity and
change.

Relate patterns of
continuity and change to
larger historical processes
and themes.

Identify and describe
models of historical
periodization that
historians use to categorize
events.

16

Identify, analyze, and
evaluate the relationship
between multiple causes
and effects.

Recognize, analyze, and
evaluate dynamics of
historical continuity and
change over periods of
time and investigate
factors that caused those
changes over time.

Recognize that choice of
specific periodizations
favors or advantages one
narrative, region, or group
over another narrative,
region, or group.
Relate patterns of
continuity and change to
larger historical processes
and themes.

Describe, analyze, evaluate,
and construct models of
historical periodization
that historians use to
categorize events.

Vertical Articulation and Progression of Social Studies Practices
Social Studies
Practices
Comparison and
Contextualization

Grades K-4

Grades 5-8

Grades 9-12

Identify a region by
describing a feature that
characterizes it, and then
compare it other regions.

Identify a region by
describing multiple
characteristics common to
places within it, and then
identify other similar
regions.

Identify multiple
perspectives of a historical
event.

Identify and compare
multiple perspectives of a
given historical experience.

Identify a region by
describing a characteristic
common to places within
it. Identify similar and
different geographic
regions across historical
time periods, and relate
differences in geography to
different historical events
and outcomes.

Describe and compare
historical developments.

Describe, compare, and
evaluate multiple historical
developments (within
societies; across and
between societies; in
various chronological and
geographical contexts).

Recognize the relationship
between geography,
economics, and history in
social studies.
Describe historical
developments with
specific circumstances,
including time and place.

17

Describe the relationship
between geography,
economics, and history as a
context for events and
movements.
Connect historical
developments to specific
circumstances of time and
place and to broader
regional, national, or global
processes.

Identify, compare, and
evaluate multiple
perspectives of a given
historical experience.

Describe, compare, and
evaluate multiple historical
developments (within
societies; across and
between societies; in
various chronological and
geographical contexts).
Describe the relationship
between geography,
economics, and history as a
context for events and
movements and as a
matrix of time and place.

Connect historical
developments to specific
circumstances of time and
place and to broader
regional, national, or global
processes, and draw
connections to the present
where appropriate.

Vertical Articulation and Progression of Social Studies Practices

18

Social Studies
Practices
Comparison and
Contextualization

Grades K-4

Grades 5-8

Grades 9-12

Geographic
Reasoning

Use location terms and
geographic
representations, such as
maps, photographs,
satellite images, and
models, to describe where
places are in relation to
each other, to describe
connections between
places, and to evaluate the
benefits of particular
places for purposeful
activities.

Use location terms and
geographic representations,
such as maps, photographs,
satellite images, and
models, to describe where
places are in relation to
each other, and to describe
connections between
places; evaluate the benefits
of particular places for
purposeful activities.

Use maps, photographs,
satellite images, and other
representations to explain
relationships between the
locations of places and
regions, and their political,
cultural, and economic
dynamics.

Distinguish human
activities and human-made
features from
“environments” (natural
events or physical
features—land, air, and
water—that are not
directly made by humans).

Distinguish human
activities and human-made
features from
“environments” (natural
events or physical
features—land, air, and
water—that are not directly
made by humans) and
describe the relationship
between human activities
and the environment.

Identify how
environments affect
human activities and how
human activities affect
physical environments.

Identify and analyze how
environments affect human
activities and how human
activities affect physical
environments.

Distinguish human
activities and human-made
features from
“environments” (natural
events or physical
features—land, air, and
water—that are not
directly made by humans);
describe and evaluate the
relationship between
human activities and the
environment.

Analyze case studies in
United States history in a
comparative framework,
while attending to the role
of chronology and
sequence, as well as
categories of comparison
or socio-political
components.

Identify, analyze, and
evaluate how
environments affect
human activities and how
human activities affect
physical environments.

Vertical Articulation and Progression of Social Studies Practices
Social Studies
Practices
Geographic
Reasoning

Economics and
Economic
Systems

Grades K-4

Grades 5-8

Grades 9-12

Recognize that
characteristics (cultural,
economic, and physicalenvironmental) of regions
affect the history of
communities, civilizations,
and nations.

Recognize and analyze how
characteristics (cultural,
economic, and physicalenvironmental) of regions
affect the history of
communities, civilizations,
and nations.

Analyze how
characteristics (cultural,
economic, and physicalenvironmental) of regions
affect the history of
communities, civilizations,
and nations.

Describe how human
activities alter places and
regions.

Characterize and analyze
changing interconnections
between places and regions.

Recognize that spatial
organizations of place,
such as boundaries, are
historically constructed.

Describe the spatial
organization of place,
considering the historical,
social, political, and
economic implication of
that organization. Identify
and describe examples of
how boundaries and
definitions of location are
historically constructed.

Explain how scarcity
necessitates decision
making; compare costs
and benefits of individual
and economic decisions.

Explain how economic
decisions affect the wellbeing of individuals,
businesses, and society;
evaluate alternative
approaches or solutions to
economic issues in terms of
benefits and costs for
different groups of people.

Distinguish between the
various types of resources
(human capital, physical
capital, and natural
resources) required to
produce goods and
services.

19

Characterize and analyze
changing interconnections
between places and
regions.

Use marginal benefits and
marginal costs to construct
an argument for or against
an approach or solution to
an economic issue.

Explain the roles of buyers
Analyze the ways in which
and sellers in product,
incentives influence what
labor, and financial markets. is produced and
distributed in a market
system.

Vertical Articulation and Progression of Social Studies Practices
Social Studies
Practices
Economics and
Economic
Systems

Grades K-4

Grades 5-8

Grades 9-12

Explain why individuals
and businesses specialize
and trade.

Describe the role of
competition in the
determination of prices and
wages in a market economy.

Explain the role of money
in making exchange easier;
examine the role of banks
in an economy.

Examine the roles of
institutions such as
corporations, non-profits,
and labor unions in a
market economy.

Evaluate the extent to
which competition
between sellers and
between buyers exists in
specific markets.

Describe concepts of
property rights and rule of
law as they apply to a
market economy.

Explain the meaning of
unemployment.

Use appropriate data to
evaluate the state of
employment,
unemployment, inflation,
total production, income,
and economic growth in the
economy.

Use economic indicators to
analyze the current and
future state of the
economy.

Explain how government
policies affect the economy.

Analyze government
economic policies and
their effects on the
national and global
economy.

Demonstrate respect for
the rights of others in
discussions and classroom
debates, regardless of
whether one agrees with
the other viewpoints.

Demonstrate respect for the
rights of others in
discussions and classroom
debates; respectfully
disagree with other
viewpoints.

Participate in activities
that focus on a classroom,
school, or community issue
or problem.

Participate in activities that
focus on a classroom,
school, community, state, or
national issue or problem.

Demonstrate respect for
the rights of others in
discussions and classroom
debates; respectfully
disagree with other
viewpoints and provide
evidence for a
counterargument.

Explain the ways the
government pays for the
goods and services it
provides, including tax
revenue.
Civic
Participation

20

Participate in activities
that focus on a classroom,
school, community, state,
or national issue or
problem.

Vertical Articulation and Progression of Social Studies Practices
Social Studies
Practices
Civic
Participation

Grades K-4

Grades 5-8

Grades 9-12

Identify differing
philosophies of social and
political participation.

Explain differing
philosophies of social and
political participation and
the role of the individual
leading to group-driven
philosophies.

Explain differing
philosophies of social and
political participation and
the role of the individual
leading to group- driven
philosophies.

Participate in persuading,
negotiating, and
compromising in the
resolution of conflicts and
differences; introduce and
examine the elements of
debate.

Participate in persuading,
debating, negotiating, and
compromising in the
resolution of conflicts and
differences.

Identify the role of the
individual in opportunities
for social and political
participation in the class,
school, or local
community.
Show respect in issues
involving difference and
conflict; participate in
negotiating and
compromising in the
resolution of differences
and conflict.
Identify situations in
which social actions are
required.

Identify those in positions
of power and how they can
influence people’s rights
and freedom.
Identify social and political
responsibilities at the
classroom, school, and
community levels.

21

Identify, describe, and
contrast the role of the
individual in opportunities
for social and political
participation in different
societies.

Identify, describe, and
contrast the role of the
individual in opportunities
for social and political
participation in different
societies.

Identify situations in which
social actions are required
and determine an
appropriate course of
action.

Identify situations in which
social actions are required
and determine an
appropriate course of
action.

Fulfill social and political
responsibilities associated
with citizenship in a
democratic society and
interdependent global
community by developing
awareness of and/or
engaging in the political
process.

Fulfill social and political
responsibilities associated
with citizenship in a
democratic society and
interdependent global
community by developing
awareness of and/or
engaging in the political
process.

Work to influence those in
positions of power to strive
for extensions of freedom,
social justice, and human
rights.

Work to influence those in
positions of power to
strive for extensions of
freedom, social justice, and
human rights.

Reading Standards for Literacy in History/Social Studies 5-12
(See note on page 10 regarding inclusion of Grade 5*)
Grades 5-8 Students
Key Ideas and Details
1. Cite specific textual evidence to
support analysis of primary and
secondary sources.
2. Determine the central ideas or
information of a primary or
secondary source; provide an
accurate summary of the source
distinct from prior knowledge or
opinions.
3. Identify key steps in a text’s
description of a process related to
history/social studies (e.g., how a
bill becomes a law, how interest
rates are raised or lowered).

Grades 9-10 Students
1. Cite specific textual evidence to
support analysis of primary and
secondary sources, attending to such
features as the date and origin of the
information.

1. Cite specific textual evidence
to support analysis of primary
and secondary sources,
connecting insights gained from
specific details to an
understanding of the text as a
whole.
2. Determine the central ideas or
2. Determine the central ideas
information of a primary or
or information of a primary or
secondary source; provide an
secondary source; provide an
accurate summary of how key
accurate summary that makes
events or ideas develop over the
clear the relationships between
course of the text.
the key details and ideas.
3. Analyze in detail a series of
3. Evaluate various explanations
events described in a text; determine for actions or events and
whether earlier events caused later
determine which explanation
ones or simply preceded them.
best accords with textual
evidence, acknowledging where
the text leaves matters
uncertain.

Craft and Structure
4. Determine the meanings of
words and phrases as they are used
in a text, including vocabulary
specific to domains related to
history/social studies.

4. Determine the meanings of words
and phrases as they are used in a
text, including vocabulary describing
political, social, or economic aspects
of history/social studies.

5. Describe how a text presents
information (e.g., sequentially,
comparatively, causally).

5. Analyze how a text uses structure
to emphasize key points or advance
an explanation or analysis.

6. Identify aspects of a text that
reveal an author’s point of view or
purpose (e.g., loaded language,
inclusion or avoidance of particular
facts).

6. Compare the point of view of two
or more authors for how they treat
the same or similar topics, including
which details they include and
emphasize in their respective
accounts.

22

Grades 11-12 students

4. Determine the meanings of
words and phrases as they are
used in a text, including
analyzing how an author uses
and refines the meaning of a key
term over the course of a text
(e.g., how Madison defines
faction in The Federalist No.10).
5. Analyze in detail how a
complex primary source is
structured, including how key
sentences, paragraphs, and
larger portions of the text
contribute to the whole.
6. Evaluate authors’ differing
points of view on the same
historical event or issue by
assessing the authors’ claims,
reasoning, and evidence.

Integration of Knowledge and Ideas
7. Integrate visual information
7. Integrate quantitative or technical
(e.g., charts, graphs, photographs,
analysis (e.g., charts, research data)
videos, or maps) with other
with qualitative analysis in print or
information in print and digital
digital text.
texts.
8. Distinguish between fact,
opinion, and reasoned judgment in
a text.

9. Analyze the relationship
between a primary and a secondary
source on the same topic.

8. Assess the extent to which the
reasoning and evidence in a text
support the author’s claims.

9. Compare and contrast treatments
of the same topic in several primary
and secondary sources.

Range of Reading and Level of Text Complexity
10. By the end of grade 8, read and 10. By the end of grade 10, read and
comprehend history/social studies comprehend history/social studies
texts in the grades 5-8 CCR text
texts in the grades 9-10 CCR text
complexity band independently and complexity band independently and
proficiently.
proficiently.

23

7. Integrate and evaluate
multiple sources of information
presented in diverse formats and
media (e.g., visually,
quantitatively, as well as
verbally) in order to address a
question or solve a problem.
8. Evaluate an author’s
premises, claims, and evidence
by corroborating or challenging
them with other information.
9. Integrate information from
diverse sources, both primary
and secondary, into a coherent
understanding of an idea or
event, noting discrepancies
between sources.
10. By the end of grade 12, read
and comprehend history/social
studies texts in the grades 11-12
CCR text complexity band
independently and proficiently.

Writing Standards for Literacy in History/Social Studies
Grades 5-8 Students
Grades 9-10 Students
Text Types and Purposes
1. Write arguments focused on
1. Write arguments focused on
discipline-specific content.
discipline-specific content.
a. Introduce claims about a topic
a. Introduce precise claims,
or issue, acknowledge and
distinguish the claims from
distinguish the claims from
alternate or opposing claims, and
alternate or opposing claims,
create an organization that
and organize the reasons and
establishes clear relationships
evidence logically.
between the claims, counterclaims,
b. Support claims with logical
reasons, and evidence.
reasoning and relevant, accurate
b. Develop claims and
data and evidence that
counterclaims fairly, supplying
demonstrate an understanding
data and evidence for each while
of the topic or text, using
pointing out the strengths and
credible sources.
limitations of both claims and
c. Use words, phrases, and
counterclaims in a disciplineclauses to create cohesion and
appropriate form and in a manner
clarify the relationships
that anticipates the audience’s
between claims, counterclaims,
knowledge level and concerns.
reasons, and evidence.
c. Use words, phrases, and clauses
d. Establish and maintain a
to link the major sections of the
formal style.
text, create cohesion, and clarify
e. Provide a concluding
relationships between claims and
statement or section that follows
reasons, between reasons and
from and supports the argument
evidence, and between claims and
presented.
counterclaims.
d. Establish and maintain a formal
style and objective tone while
attending to the norms and
conventions of the discipline in
which the work is written.
e. Provide a concluding statement
or section that follows from and
supports the argument presented.

2. Write informative/explanatory
texts, including the narration of
historical events or technical
processes.
a. Introduce a topic, clearly
previewing what is to follow;
organize ideas, concepts, and
information into broader
categories as appropriate to

24

2. Write informative/explanatory
texts, including the narration of
historical events or technical
processes.
a. Introduce a topic and organize
ideas, concepts, and information to
make important connections and
distinctions; include formatting
(e.g., headings), graphics (e.g.,

Grades 11-12 Students
1. Write arguments focused on
discipline-specific content.
a. Introduce precise,
knowledgeable claims, establish
the significance of the claims,
distinguish the claims from
alternate or opposing claims, and
create an organization that
logically sequences the claims,
counterclaims, reasons, and
evidence.
b. Develop claims and
counterclaims fairly and
thoroughly, supplying the most
relevant data and evidence for
each while pointing out the
strengths and limitations of both
claims and counterclaims in a
discipline-appropriate form that
anticipates the audience’s
knowledge level, concerns,
values, and possible biases.
c. Use words, phrases, and
clauses as well as varied syntax
to link the major sections of the
text, create cohesion, and clarify
the relationships between claims
and reasons, between reasons
and evidence, and between
claims and counterclaims.
d. Establish and maintain a
formal style and objective tone
while attending to the norms and
conventions of the discipline in
which the work is written.
e. Provide a concluding statement
or section that follows from and
supports the argument
presented.
2. Write informative/explanatory
texts, including the narration of
historical events or technical
processes.
a. Introduce a topic and organize
complex ideas, concepts, and
information so that each new
element builds on that which
precedes it to create a unified

achieving purpose; include
formatting (e.g., headings),
graphics (e.g., charts, tables),
and multimedia when useful in
aiding comprehension.
b. Develop the topic with
relevant, well-chosen facts,
definitions, concrete details,
quotations, or other information
and examples.
c. Use appropriate and varied
transitions to create cohesion
and clarify the relationships
between ideas and concepts.
d. Use precise language and
domain-specific vocabulary to
inform about or explain the
topic.
e. Establish and maintain a
formal style and objective tone.
f. Provide a concluding
statement or section that follows
from and supports the
information or explanation
presented.

figures, tables), and multimedia
when useful in aiding
comprehension.
b. Develop the topic with wellchosen, relevant, and sufficient
facts, extended definitions,
concrete details, quotations, or
other information and examples
appropriate to the audience’s
knowledge of the topic.
c. Use varied transitions and
sentence structures to link the
major sections of the text, create
cohesion, and clarify the
relationships between ideas and
concepts.
d. Use precise language and
domain-specific vocabulary to
manage the complexity of the topic
and convey a style appropriate to
the discipline and context as well
as to the expertise of likely
readers.
e. Establish and maintain a formal
style and objective tone while
attending to the norms and
conventions of the discipline in
which the work is written.
f. Provide a concluding statement
or section that follows from and
supports the information or
explanation presented (e.g.,
articulating implications or the
significance of the topic).

3. (See note: not applicable as a
separate requirement)

3. (See note: not applicable as a
separate requirement)

whole; include formatting (e.g.,
headings), graphics (e.g., figures,
tables), and multimedia when
useful in aiding comprehension.
b. Develop the topic thoroughly
by selecting the most significant
and relevant facts, extended
definitions, concrete details,
quotations, or other information
and examples appropriate to the
audience’s knowledge of the
topic.
c. Use varied transitions and
sentence structures to link the
major sections of the text, create
cohesion, and clarify the
relationships between complex
ideas and concepts.
d. Use precise language, domainspecific vocabulary, and
techniques such as metaphor,
simile, and analogy to manage
the complexity of the topic;
convey a knowledgeable stance
in a style that responds to the
discipline and context as well as
to the expertise of likely readers.
e. Establish and maintain a
formal style and objective tone
while attending to the norms and
conventions of the discipline in
which the work is written.
f. Provide a concluding
statement or section that follows
from and supports the
information or explanation
provided (e.g., articulating
implications or the significance
of the topic).
3. (See note: not applicable as a
separate requirement)

Note: Students’ narrative skills continue to grow in these grades. The Standards require that students be able to
incorporate narrative elements effectively into arguments and informative/explanatory texts. In history/social
studies, students must be able to incorporate narrative accounts into their analyses of individuals or events of
historical importance.

25

Grades 5-8 Students
Grades 9-10 Students
Production and Distribution of Writing
4. Produce clear and coherent
4. Produce clear and coherent
writing in which the development,
writing in which the development,
organization, and style are
organization, and style are
appropriate to task, purpose, and
appropriate to task, purpose, and
audience.
audience.
5. With some guidance and support 5. Develop and strengthen writing as
from peers and adults, develop and
needed by planning, revising, editing,
strengthen writing as needed by
rewriting, or trying a new approach,
planning, revising, editing,
focusing on addressing what is most
rewriting, or trying a new approach, significant for a specific purpose and
focusing on how well purpose and
audience.
audience have been addressed.

4. Produce clear and coherent
writing in which the
development, organization, and
style are appropriate to task,
purpose, and audience.
5. Develop and strengthen
writing as needed by planning,
revising, editing, rewriting, or
trying a new approach, focusing
on addressing what is most
significant for a specific purpose
and audience.

Research to Build and Present Knowledge
7. Conduct short research projects
7. Conduct short as well as more
to answer a question (including a
sustained research projects to
self-generated question), drawing
answer a question (including a selfon several sources and generating
generated question) or solve a
additional related, focused
problem; narrow or broaden the
questions that allow for multiple
inquiry when appropriate;
avenues of exploration.
synthesize multiple sources on the
subject, demonstrating
understanding of the subject under
investigation.

7. Conduct short as well as more
sustained research projects to
answer a question (including a
self-generated question) or solve
a problem; narrow or broaden
the inquiry when appropriate;
synthesize multiple sources on
the subject, demonstrating
understanding of the subject
under investigation.

6. Use technology, including the
Internet, to produce and publish
writing and present the
relationships between information
and ideas clearly and efficiently.

8. Gather relevant information from
multiple print and digital sources,
using search terms effectively;
assess the credibility and accuracy
of each source; quote or paraphrase
the data and conclusions of others
while avoiding plagiarism and
following a standard format for
citation.

26

6. Use technology, including the
Internet, to produce, publish, and
update individual or shared writing
products, taking advantage of
technology’s capacity to link to other
information and to display
information flexibly and dynamically.

8. Gather relevant information from
multiple authoritative print and
digital sources, using advanced
searches effectively; assess the
usefulness of each source in
answering the research question;
integrate information into the text
selectively to maintain the flow of
ideas, avoiding plagiarism and
following a standard format for
citation.

Grades 11-12 Students

6. Use technology, including the
Internet, to produce, publish, and
update individual or shared
writing products in response to
ongoing feedback, including new
arguments or information.

8. Gather relevant information
from multiple authoritative print
and digital sources, using
advanced searches effectively;
assess the strengths and
limitations of each source in
terms of the specific task,
purpose, and audience; integrate
information into the text
selectively to maintain the flow
of ideas, avoiding plagiarism and
overreliance on any one source
and following a standard format
for citation.

Research to Build and Present Knowledge (continued)
9. Draw evidence from
9. Draw evidence from informational
informational texts to support
texts to support analysis, reflection,
analysis, reflection, and research.
and research.
Range of Writing
10. Write routinely over extended
10. Write routinely over extended
time frames (time for reflection and time frames (time for reflection and
revision) and shorter time frames
revision) and shorter time frames (a
(a single sitting or a day or two) for single sitting or a day or two) for a
a range of discipline-specific tasks,
range of discipline-specific tasks,
purposes, and audiences.
purposes, and audiences.

27

9. Draw evidence from
informational texts to support
analysis, reflection, and research.

10. Write routinely over extended
time frames (time for reflection
and revision) and shorter time
frames (a single sitting or a day or
two) for a range of disciplinespecific tasks, purposes, and
audiences.

Reference Documents
New York State P-12 Common Core Learning Standards for English Language Arts & Literacy (2011)

http://www.p12.nysed.gov/ciai/common_core_standards/pdfdocs/p12_common_core_learning_standards_ela.pdf

New York State Learning Standards for Social Studies (1996)
Resource Guide with Core Curriculum (1999)
Economics, the Enterprise System, and Finance (2002)
Participation in Government (2002)
http://www.p12.nysed.gov/ciai/socst/ssrg.html

College, Career, and Civic Life (C3) Framework for State Standards in Social Studies, National Council for the Social
Studies (2013) http://www.socialstudies.org/c3
National Curriculum Standards for Social Studies: A Framework for Teaching, Learning, and Assessment, National Council
for the Social Studies (2010)
Voluntary National Content Standards in Economics, 2nd Edition, Council for Economic Education, (2010)

http://www.councilforeconed.org/wp/wp-content/uploads/2012/03/voluntary-national-content-standards-2010.pdf

History Standards, National Center for History in the Schools UCLA (1996)
http://www.nchs.ucla.edu/Standards/

U.S. History Framework for the 2010 National Assessment of Educational Progress, National Assessment Governing
Board, U.S. Department of Education (2003)
http://www.nagb.org/content/nagb/assets/documents/publications/frameworks/historyframework.pdf

AP World History Course and Exam Description, College Board (2011)

http://apcentral.collegeboard.com/apc/public/repository/AP_WorldHistoryCED_Effective_Fall_2011.pdf

AP Human Geography Course Description, College Board (2011) http://apcentral.collegeboard.com/apc/public/repository/ap-

human-geography-course-description.pdf

Habits of the Mind, National Council for History Education http://www.nche.net/document.doc?id=43
History-Social Science Content Standards for California Public Schools (1998)
http://www.cde.ca.gov/be/st/ss/documents/histsocscistnd.pdf

Indiana Department of Education Standards
http://www.doe.in.gov/achievement/standards

Massachusetts History and Social Science Curriculum Framework (2003) http://www.doe.mass.edu/frameworks/hss/final.pdf
New Jersey Core Curriculum Content Standards for Social Studies (2009)
http://www.state.nj.us/education/cccs/standards/6/index.html

Virginia Standards of Learning and Testing, History and Social Science (2008)

http://www.doe.virginia.gov/testing/sol/standards_docs/history_socialscience/index.shtml

World History for Us All, San Diego State University (2003)
http://worldhistoryforusall.sdsu.edu/
28

