Learning Standards for
Social Studies

Revised Edition
June 1996

THE UNIVERSITY OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK
Regents of The University
Carl T. Hayden, Chancellor, A.B., J.D. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Elmira
Louise P. Matteoni, Vice Chancellor, B.A., M.A., Ph.D.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . Bayside
Jorge L. Batista, B.A., J.D. . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Bronx
J. Edward Meyer, B.A., LL.B.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Chappaqua
R. Carlos Carballada, Chancellor Emeritus, B.S. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Rochester
Norma Gluck, B.A., M.S.W. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . New York
Adelaide L. Sanford, B.A., M.A., P.D.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Hollis
Walter Cooper, B.A., Ph.D. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Rochester
Diane O’Neill McGivern, B.S.N., M.A., Ph.D. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Staten Island
Saul B. Cohen, B.A., M.A., Ph. D. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . New Rochelle
James C. Dawson, A.A., B.A., M.S., Ph.D. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Peru
Robert M. Bennett, B.A., M.S.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Tonawanda
Robert M. Johnson, B.S., J.D.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Lloyd Harbor
Peter M. Pryor, B.A., LL.B., J.D., LL.D.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Albany
Anthony S. Bottar, B.A., J.D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Syracuse
Merryl H. Tisch, B.A., M.A.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .New York
President of The University and Commissioner of Education
RICHARD P. MILLS
Executive Deputy Commissioner of Education
THOMAS E. SHELDON
Deputy Commissioner for Elementary, Middle, Secondary, and Continuing
Education
JAMES A. KADAMUS
Assistant Commissioner for Curriculum, Instruction, Assessment, and Innovation
EDWARD T. LALOR
Coordinator of Curriculum and Instruction
ROSEANNE DEFABIO

The State Education Department does not discriminate on the basis of age, color, religion, creed, disability,
marital status, veteran status, national origin, race, gender or sexual orientation in its educational programs,
services and activities. Portions of this publication can be made available in a variety of formats, including
braille, large print or audio tape, upon request. Inquiries concerning this policy of nondiscrimination should
be directed to the Department’s Office for Diversity, Ethics, and Access, Room 152, Education Building,
Albany, NY 12234.

CONTENTS
Acknowledgments iv
Introduction vi
LEARNING STANDARDS FOR SOCIAL STUDIES 1
SAMPLES OF STUDENT WORK RELATED TO THE STANDARDS 31

iii

Acknowledgments
Many contributors to this document are recognized in the Preliminary Draft Framework for Social Studies. We are
also grateful to the many teachers from throughout New York State who contributed performance tasks and sam­
ples of student work for possible inclusion in this revised edition. Listed below are the names of those educators
who submitted or reviewed the materials that appear in this document.

Contributors
Peter Abbey
Paul Bachorz
John-Paul Bianchi
Jean Blakley
Marna Burstein
Barbara Carson-Jones
Robert Clark
Carletta Corron
Edward Crotty
Doreen Dell
Mary Eads
William Fetsko
Ann Fronckowiak
Linda Fusco
Walter Gable
Donald Gee
Anthony Gero
Steven Goldberg
Alice Grant
Thomas Henry
Benita Jorkasky
Tamara Lipke
Ruth H. Mowry
William Neer
Linda C. Neri
Theresa C. Noonan
Jane Orofino
Tamara Pozantides
Michael Romano
Diane Rosen
Arlene Simon
Sharon Sobierajski
Jeffrey H. Trout
Gary VanCour
David Wetzel
Gregory Wilsey
Jeanette Zaloom
iv

JHS 240, Brooklyn
Niskayuna High School, Schenectady
Community School District #8, The Bronx
Honeoye Falls-Lima School District
Buffalo Public School #82
Buffalo Traditional School
Honeoye Falls-Lima School District
Beekmantown Central School District, Plattsburgh
Niskayuna High School, Schenectady
Williamsville Central School District
Niskayuna High School, Schenectady
Liverpool Central School District
Buffalo Public Schools
Williamsville Central School District
Seneca Falls Central School District
Seneca Falls Central School District
Auburn High School
New Rochelle City School District
Pelham Union Free School District
Liverpool Central School District
SUNY Brockport
West Irondequoit High School, Rochester
Beekmantown Central School District, Plattsburgh
Soule Road Middle School, Liverpool
Lafayette High School, Buffalo
West Irondequoit High School, Rochester
Auburn High School
Buffalo Bilingual Early Childhood Center #36
Northport School District
JHS 240, Brooklyn
Pelham Union Free School District
Buffalo Public School #53
Seneca Falls Central School District
Beekmantown Central School District, Plattsburgh
Niskayuna High School, Schenectady
Law, Youth, and Citizenship Program
New Rochelle City School District

Acknowledgments

State Education Department
Norman Abramowitz
Annette Argyros
Jan Christman
Major Capers
Roseanne DeFabio
George Gregory
Beverly Ivey
Barry Jamason
Barbara Kelly
Edward Lalor
JoAnn Larson
Gary Warren

v

Learning Standards for
Social Studies at Three Levels
Standard 1: History of the United States and New York
Students will use a variety of intellectual skills to demonstrate their understanding of major ideas,
eras, themes, developments, and turning points in the history of the United States and New York.

Standard 2: World History
Students will use a variety of intellectual skills to demonstrate their understanding of major ideas,
eras, themes, developments, and turning points in world history and examine the broad sweep of his­
tory from a variety of perspectives.

Standard 3: Geography
Students will use a variety of intellectual skills to demonstrate their understanding of the geography
of the interdependent world in which we live—local, national, and global—including the distribution
of people, places, and environments over the Earth’s surface.

Standard 4: Economics
Students will use a variety of intellectual skills to demonstrate their understanding of how the
United States and other societies develop economic systems and associated institutions to allocate
scarce resources, how major decision-making units function in the United States and other national
economies, and how an economy solves the scarcity problem through market and nonmarket
mechanisms.

Standard 5: Civics, Citizenship, and Government
Students will use a variety of intellectual skills to demonstrate their understanding of the necessity
for establishing governments; the governmental system of the United States and other nations; the
United States Constitution; the basic civic values of American constitutional democracy; and the
roles, rights, and responsibilities of citizenship, including avenues of participation.

1

Standard 1—History of the United States
and New York
Elementary

1. The study of New York State and United States
history requires an analysis of the development of
American culture, its diversity and multicultural
context, and the ways people are unified by many
values, practices, and traditions.

2. Important ideas, social and cultural values, beliefs,
and traditions from New York State and United States
history illustrate the connections and interactions of
people and events across time and from a variety of
perspectives.

Students:
• know the roots of American culture, its development
from many different traditions, and the ways many
people from a variety of groups and backgrounds played
a role in creating it
• understand the basic ideals of American democracy as
explained in the Declaration of Independence and the
Constitution and other important documents
• explain those values, practices, and traditions that unite
all Americans.

Students:
• gather and organize information about the traditions
transmitted by various groups living in their
neighborhood and community
• recognize how traditions and practices were passed from
one generation to the next
• distinguish between near and distant past and interpret
simple timelines.

This is evident, for example, when students:
▲ read stories about the early days of American society and discuss
the way of life of those times
▲ discuss how basic ideals of American democracy are shown in such
speeches as Lincoln’s Gettysburg Address and Martin Luther
King’s “I Have a Dream” speech
▲ explain ways that families long ago expressed and transmitted
their beliefs and values through oral traditions, literature,
songs, art, religion, community celebrations, mementos, food,
and language (Taken from National Standards for History for

Grades K-4)
▲ compare the characters and events described in historical fiction
with primary sources such as historic sites themselves; artifacts
of the time found in museums and at state historic sites;
journals, diaries, and photographs of the historical figures in
stories; and news articles and other records from the period in
order to judge the historical accuracy and determine the variety
of perspectives included in the story. (Adapted from National
Standards for History for Grades K-4).

Key ideas are identified by numbers (1).
Performance indicators are identified by bullets (•).
Sample tasks are identified by triangles (▲).

2

This is evident, for example, when students:
▲ conduct interviews with family members, collect family
memorabilia such as letters, diaries, stories, photographs, and
keepsakes; classify information by type of activity: social,
political, economic, cultural, or religious; discuss how traditions
and practices were passed from one generation to the next;
determine the extent to which the traditions and practices are
shared by other members of the class
▲ study the history and traditions of their neighborhoods and local
communities. Consider the school and school community by
describing who attends school (diversity, demographics); the
histories of their schools and school communities (then and
now); what was taught; and rights, rules, and responsibilities
(then and now).
▲ research the neighborhood or local community, considering
location and the significance of its location; its demographics
(e.g., ethnicity, languages, religions, levels of education, age
groups); the history of why it was settled, when and by whom;
economic patterns and changes in employment; social and
cultural life; and government and politics
▲ create personal and family timelines to distinguish between
near and distant past and identify family origins; interpret
simple timelines by recognizing correct chronological order of
major events such as Native American settlement of North
America, Columbus’s voyage in 1492, the American Revolution,
writing the Constitution, the presidency of Abraham Lincoln,
World War I, and the beginning of space exploration.

STANDARD 1

Students will use a variety of intellectual skills to demonstrate their understanding
of major ideas, eras, themes, developments, and turning points in the history of the
United States and New York.
Elementary

3. Study about the major social, political, economic,
cultural, and religious developments in New York
State and United States history involves learning
about the important roles and contributions of
individuals and groups.
Students:
• gather and organize information about the important
accomplishments of individuals and groups, including
Native American Indians, living in their neighborhoods
and communities
• classify information by type of activity: social, political,
economic, technological, scientific, cultural, or religious
• identify individuals who have helped to strengthen
democracy in the United States and throughout the world.

This is evident, for example, when students:
▲ listen to and participate in classroom debates and discussions of
important events and people in U. S. history and New York
history, and examine more than one viewpoint on some events
and people
▲ discuss heroes, why some people are heroes, and why some
individuals might be heroes to certain groups and not to others
▲ conduct a historical case study about an important
environmental concern affecting their city’s or neighborhood’s
water supply, housing accommodations, or transportation
system, and examine competing views on the issues
▲ investigate the importance of scientific and technological
inventions such as the compass, steam engine, internal
combustion engine, and computer chip.

4. The skills of historical analysis include the ability
to: explain the significance of historical evidence;
weigh the importance, reliability, and validity of
evidence; understand the concept of multiple
causation; understand the importance of changing and
competing interpretations of different historical
developments.
Students:
• consider different interpretations of key events and/or
issues in history and understand the differences in these
accounts
• explore different experiences, beliefs, motives, and
traditions of people living in their neighborhoods,
communities, and State
• view historic events through the eyes of those who were
there, as shown in their art, writings, music, and artifacts.

This is evident, for example, when students:
▲ read historical narratives, literature, and many kinds of
documents and investigate building, tools, clothing, and artwork
to explore key events and/or issues in the history of their city,
community, neighborhood, state, and nation; summarize the main
ideas evident in the source and identify the purpose or point of
view from which the source was created; discuss how
interpretations or perspectives develop and change as new
information is learned. (Based on National Standards for History
Grades K-4)
▲ visit historic sites, museums, libraries, and memorials to gather
information about important events that affected their
neighborhoods, communities, or region
▲ explore the literature, oral traditions, drama, art, architecture,
music, dance, and other primary sources of a particular historic
period.

STANDARD 1

3

Standard 1—History of the United States
and New York
Intermediate

1. The study of New York State and United States
history requires an analysis of the development of
American culture, its diversity and multicultural
context, and the ways people are unified by many
values, practices, and traditions.

2. Important ideas, social and cultural values, beliefs,
and traditions from New York State and United States
history illustrate the connections and interactions of
people and events across time and from a variety of
perspectives.

Students:
• explore the meaning of American culture by identifying
the key ideas, beliefs, and patterns of behavior, and
traditions that help define it and unite all Americans
• interpret the ideas, values, and beliefs contained in the
Declaration of Independence and the New York State
Constitution and United States Constitution, Bill of
Rights, and other important historical documents.

Students:
• describe the reasons for periodizing history in different
ways
• investigate key turning points in New York State and
United States history and explain why these events or
developments are significant
• understand the relationship between the relative impor­
tance of United States domestic and foreign policies over
time
• analyze the role played by the United States in
international politics, past and present.

This is evident, for example, when students:
▲ explain the ideas embodied in the Declaration of Independence,
the United States Constitution, the Bill of Rights, and the New
York State Constitution and show how these documents express
fundamental and enduring ideas and beliefs
▲ describe how massive immigration, forced migration, changing
roles for women, and internal migration led to new social
patterns and conflicts; and identify ideas of national unity that
developed amidst growing cultural diversity. (Adapted from

National Standards for U.S. History)

STANDARD 1

Key ideas are identified by numbers (1).
Performance indicators are identified by bullets (•).
Sample tasks are identified by triangles (▲).

4

This is evident, for example, when students:
▲ use demographic information, mapping exercises, photographs,
interviews, population graphs, church records, newspaper
accounts, and other sources to conduct case studies of particular
groups in the history of the State or nation and classify
information according to type of activity: social, political,
economic, cultural, or religious
▲ use a variety of sources to study historic and contemporary
events in the United States; investigate different interpretations
of the events and identify circumstances of time and place that
influence the authors’ perspectives (Adapted from National
Standards for U.S. History)
▲ recognize the reasons for periodizing history and know some
designations of historical periods; discuss the usefulness of the
following periods:
- Three Worlds and Their Meeting in the Americas
(Beginnings to 1607)
- Colonization, Settlement and Communities (1607 to 1763)
- The Revolution and the New Nation (1763 to 1815)
- Expansion and Reform (1801 to 1861)
- Crisis of the Union: Civil War and Reconstruction (1850 to
1877)
- The Development of Modern America (1865 to 1920)
- Modern America and the World Wars (1914 to 1945)
- Contemporary America (1945 to Present)
(Taken from U. S. History Framework for the 1994 National
Assessment of Educational Progress)
▲ undertake case studies to research violations of basic civil and
human rights and case studies of genocide. Use examples from
United States, New York State, and world history. Case studies
might include chattel slavery and the Nazi Holocaust. Other
civil and human rights violations might focus on the mass
starvation in Ireland (1845-50), the forced relocation of Native
American Indians, and the internment of Japanese Americans
during World War II
▲ trace the tension between arguments for United States isolation
versus engagement during the following time periods: up to
1941, from 1941-1975, and from 1976 to the present.

Students will use a variety of intellectual skills to demonstrate their understanding
of major ideas, eras, themes, developments, and turning points in the history of the
United States and New York.
Intermediate

3. Study about the major social, political, economic,
cultural, and religious developments in New York
State and United States history involves learning
about the important roles and contributions of
individuals and groups.
Students:
• complete well-documented and historically accurate case
studies about individuals and groups who represent
different ethnic, national, and religious groups, including
Native American Indians, in New York State and the
United States at different times and in different locations
• gather and organize information about the important
achievements and contributions of individuals and
groups living in New York State and the United States
• describe how ordinary people and famous historic
figures in the local community, State, and the United
States have advanced the fundamental democratic
values, beliefs, and traditions expressed in the
Declaration of Independence, the New York State and
United States Constitutions, the Bill of Rights, and other
important historic documents
• classify major developments into categories such as
social, political, economic, geographic, technological,
scientific, cultural, or religious.

This is evident, for example, when students:
▲ research major events and themes from New York State and
United States history (e.g., the American Revolution, new
national period, Civil War, age of industrialization, westward
movement and territorial expansion, the World Wars) to develop
and test hypotheses and develop conclusions about the roles
played by individuals and groups
▲ after reading about ordinary people in historic time periods,
such as a Revolutionary War soldier, a suffragist, or a child
laborer during the 1800s, write a short story or diary account
explaining how this individual fought to support democratic
values and beliefs (Adapted from National Standards for

History for Grades K-4)

4. The skills of historical analysis include the ability
to: explain the significance of historical evidence;
weigh the importance, reliability, and validity of
evidence; understand the concept of multiple
causation; understand the importance of changing and
competing interpretations of different historical
developments.
Students:
• consider the sources of historic documents, narratives, or
artifacts and evaluate their reliability
• understand how different experiences, beliefs, values,
traditions, and motives cause individuals and groups to
interpret historic events and issues from different
perspectives
• compare and contrast different interpretations of key
events and issues in New York State and United States
history and explain reasons for these different accounts
• describe historic events through the eyes and
experiences of those who were there. (Taken from
National Standards for History for Grades K-4)

This is evident, for example, when students:
▲ identify the author’s or artist’s main point of view or purpose in
creating a document or artifact
▲ compare several historical accounts of the same event in New
York State or United States history and contrast the different
facts included or omitted from each author and determine the
different authors’ points of view
▲ use a variety of sources to study important turning points from
different perspectives and to identify varying points of view of
the people involved (e.g., European settlement and the impact of
diseases on Native American Indian populations, writing the
Declaration of Independence and the Constitution, the Civil War,
industrialization, significant reform movements, and the Cold
War)
▲ debate various views of United States foreign policies and
involvement during the Mexican-American War, World Wars I
and II, Vietnam, and the Cold War.

▲ explain the importance of different inventions and scientific and
technological innovations in agriculture and industry, describing
how these inventions and innovations resulted in imporved
production of certain products.

STANDARD 1

5

Standard 1—History of the United States
and New York
Commencement

1. The study of New York State and United States
history requires an analysis of the development of
American culture, its diversity and multicultural
context, and the ways people are unified by many
values, practices, and traditions.

2. Important ideas, social and cultural values, beliefs,
and traditions from New York State and United States
history illustrate the connections and interactions of
people and events across time and from a variety of
perspectives.

Students:
• analyze the development of American culture, explaining
how ideas, values, beliefs, and traditions have changed
over time and how they unite all Americans
• describe the evolution of American democratic values
and beliefs as expressed in the Declaration of
Independence, the New York State Constitution, the
United States Constitution, the Bill of Rights, and other
important historical documents.

Students:
• discuss several schemes for periodizing the history of
New York State and the United States
• develop and test hypotheses about important events,
eras, or issues in New York State and United States
history, setting clear and valid criteria for judging the
importance and significance of these events, eras, or
issues
• compare and contrast the experiences of different groups
in the United States
• examine how the Constitution, United States law, and the
rights of citizenship provide a major unifying factor in
bringing together Americans from diverse roots and
traditions
• analyze the United States involvement in foreign affairs
and a willingness to engage in international politics,
examining the ideas and traditions leading to these for­
eign policies
• compare and contrast the values exhibited and foreign
policies implemented by the United States and other
nations over time with those expressed in the United
Nations Charter and international law.

This is evident, for example, when students:
▲ explore the meaning of the United States motto, “E Pluribus
Unum,” by identifying both those forces that unite Americans
and those that potentially divide Americans. Based on a study of
key events in United States history, such as the American
Revolution, the Civil War, the women’s suffrage movement, and
the civil rights movement, discuss how at least two core civic
ideas, such as individual rights and the consent of the governed,
have been forces for national unity in this diverse society
▲ analyze the decisions leading to major turning points in United
States history, comparing alternative courses of action, and
hypothesizing, within the context of the historic period, about
what might have happened if the decision had been different.
Investigate decisions and actions such as:
- the signing of the Declaration of Independence in 1776
- the forced relocation of Native American Indians
- the Mexican-American War
- Lincoln’s resolve to sustain the Union
- Plessy v. Ferguson Supreme Court decision
- Progressive reforms
- United States entry into World Wars I and II
- the decision to refrain from joining the League of Nations
- ratification of the Nineteenth Amendment
- Roosevelt’s New Deal
- the decision to drop the atomic bomb on Japan in 1945
- Rosa Parks’ decision to challenge the Jim Crow laws in
Alabama in 1955
- American involvement in Southeast Asia in the 1960s and
1970s
- the end of the Cold War and the democratic revolutions in
Eastern European countries
▲ read Dr. Martin Luther King’s “Letter from Birmingham Jail”
and discuss how this letter expresses the basic ideas, values,
and beliefs found in the United States Constitution and Bill of
Rights.

Key ideas are identified by numbers (1).
Performance indicators are identified by bullets (•).
Sample tasks are identified by triangles (▲).

6

This is evident, for example, when students:
▲ discuss several schemes for periodizing the history of the United
States; explain the usefulness of each scheme; comment on why
another person might want to use other approaches to
periodization; make a case for the scheme that seems best
▲ explain the contributions of specific groups of people to
American society and culture; analyze the metaphors of the
“melting pot” and the “salad bowl” to explain the experiences of
the first immigrant groups (e.g., Dutch, Irish, English, African
American, Spanish, German) as compared to those of later
groups (e.g., Italian, Greek, Eastern European, Chinese, Latino,
Vietnamese) and present an analysis, supported by historical
evidence, of alternative metaphors, such as “a tapestry” or “a
mosaic”
▲ examine the effects of immigration on various Native American
groups
▲ investigate how the United States’ democratic principles have
influenced the constitutions and governments of other nations;
view this sharing as a two-way exchange, with the United
States influencing and being influenced by other nations.

STANDARD 1

Students will use a variety of intellectual skills to demonstrate their understanding
of major ideas, eras, themes, developments, and turning points in the history of the
United States and New York.
Commencement

3. Study about the major social, political, economic,
cultural, and religious developments in New York
State and United States history involves learning
about the important roles and contributions of
individuals and groups.
Students:
• compare and contrast the experiences of different ethnic,
national, and religious groups, including Native
American Indians, in the United States, explaining their
contributions to American society and culture
• research and analyze the major themes and
developments in New York State and United States
history (e.g., colonization and settlement; Revolution and
New National Period; immigration; expansion and reform
era; Civil War and Reconstruction; The American labor
movement; Great Depression; World Wars; contemporary
United States)
• prepare essays and oral reports about the important
social, political, economic, scientific, technological, and
cultural developments, issues, and events from New York
State and United States history
• understand the interrelationships between world events
and developments in New York State and the United
States (e.g., causes for immigration, economic
opportunities, human rights abuses, and tyranny versus
freedom).

This is evident, for example, when students:
▲ investigate how Americans have reconciled the inherent
tensions and conflicts over minority versus majority rights by
researching the abolitionist and reform movements of the
nineteenth century, the civil rights and women’s rights
movements of the twentieth century, or the social protest
movements of the 1960s and 1970s
▲ draw upon literary selections, historical documents, and
accounts to analyze the roles played by different individuals and
groups during the major eras in New York State and United
States history
▲ compare and analyze the major arguments for and against
major political developments in New York State and United
States history, such as the ratification of the United States
Constitution, Reconstruction, the New Deal, and the Great
Society programs of the 1960s
▲ research how leaders, such as Frederick Douglass, Harriet
Tubman, Theodore Parker, Sojourner Truth, David Walker, and
Sarah and Angelina Grimke, fought for the rights of African
Americans.

4. The skills of historical analysis include the ability
to: explain the significance of historical evidence;
weigh the importance, reliability, and validity of evi­
dence; understand the concept of multiple causation;
understand the importance of changing and competing
interpretations of different historical developments.
Students:
• analyze historical narratives about key events in New
York State and United States history to identify the facts
and evaluate the authors’ perspectives
• consider different historians’ analyses of the same event
or development in United States history to understand
how different viewpoints and/or frames of reference
influence historical interpretations
• evaluate the validity and credibility of historical inter­
pretations of important events or issues in New York
State or United States history, revising these interpreta­
tions as new information is learned and other interpreta­
tions are developed. (Adapted from National Standards
for United States History)

This is evident, for example, when students:
▲ analyze important debates in American history (e.g., ratification
of the United States Constitution, abolition of slavery, regulation
of big business, restrictions on immigration, the New Deal
legislation, women’s suffrage, United States involvement in
foreign affairs and wars), focusing on the opposing positions and
the historical evidence used to support these positions
▲ prepare extended research papers on an important issue,
problem or theme from New York State or United States history,
including an analysis of the differing or competing interpreta­
tions of the issue or problem
▲ develop hypotheses about important events, eras, or issues;
move from chronicling to explaining historical events and issues;
use information collected from diverse sources (e.g., diaries,
census reports, city directories and maps, newspaper and
journal accounts, graphs and charts, cartoons, autobiographies,
government documents, and other primary and secondary
sources) to produce cogently written reports and documentbased essays; apply the skills of historiography by comparing,
contrasting, and evaluating the interpretations of different
historians of an event, era, or issue.

STANDARD 1

7

Standard 2—World History
Elementary

1. The study of world history requires an
understanding of world cultures and civilizations,
including an analysis of important ideas, social and
cultural values, beliefs, and traditions. This study also
examines the human condition and the connections
and interactions of people across time and space and
the ways different people view the same event or issue
from a variety of perspectives.
Students:
• read historical narratives, myths, legends, biographies,
and autobiographies to learn about how historical
figures lived, their motivations, hopes, fears, strengths,
and weaknesses
• explore narrative accounts of important events from
world history to learn about different accounts of the
past to begin to understand how interpretations and
perspectives develop
• study about different world cultures and civilizations
focusing on their accomplishments, contributions,
values, beliefs, and traditions.

This is evident, for example, when students:
▲ create a list of characteristics for the concept of civilization,
focusing on the early civilizations that developed in
Mesopotamia, Egypt, and the Indus Valley
▲ analyze pictures and maps of the civilizations of Kush and
Egypt, including information about their architectural, artistic,
and technological achievements
▲ assume the roles of citizens, merchants, foreign residents, or
slaves in ancient Sparta or Athens, describing life in these citystates, the rights and responsibilities of a citizen in each city,
and their social and political roles
▲ research different kinds of sources (archaeological, artistic,
written) about the civilizations in the Americas before the
coming of the Europeans (Taken from National Standards for
World History)
▲ study about the major cultural achievements of an ancient
civilization (e.g., West African, Japanese, Chinese, European).

Key ideas are identified by numbers (1).
Performance indicators are identified by bullets (•).
Sample tasks are identified by triangles (▲).

8

2. Establishing timeframes, exploring different
periodizations, examining themes across time and
within cultures, and focusing on important turning
points in world history help organize the study of
world cultures and civilizations.
Students:
• distinguish between past, present, and future time
periods
• develop timelines that display important events and eras
from world history
• measure and understand the meaning of calendar time in
terms of years, decades, centuries, and millennia, using
BC and AD as reference points
• compare important events and accomplishments from
different time periods in world history.

This is evident, for example, when students:
▲ arrange the events in a historical narrative, biography, or
autobiography in correct chronological order
▲ group important historic events in world history according to
clearly defined time periods (periodization). For example,
periods might include early civilizations, rise of empires, age of
exploration, the twentieth century
▲ create, as part of a class, a mural-sized, illustrated timeline of
important achievements, inventions, and accomplishments of
nineteenth century Europe and America (Adapted from National
Standards for World History)
▲ identify key turning points and important events in world
history and explain their significance
▲ create personal and family timelines to distinguish between near
and distant past and interpret simple timelines that show a
progression of events in world history; create a picture timeline
tracing developments in world history, such as the appearance of
the wheel, making simple tools out of iron (Hittites), building the
pyramids, building Roman aqueducts, inventing paper in China,
astronomical discoveries in the Muslim world, metallurgy
advances in West Africa, and the invention of the steam engine in
England. (Adapted from National Standards for History for
Grades K-4)

STANDARD 2

Students will use a variety of intellectual skills to demonstrate their understanding
of major ideas, eras, themes, developments, and turning points in world history and
examine the broad sweep of history from a variety of perspectives.
Elementary

3. Study of the major social, political, cultural, and
religious developments in world history involves
learning about the important roles and contributions
of individuals and groups.
Students:
• understand the roles and contributions of individuals and
groups to social, political, economic, cultural, scientific,
technological, and religious practices and activities
• gather and present information about important
developments from world history
• understand how the terms social, political, economic, and
cultural can be used to describe human activities or
practices.

This is evident, for example, when students:
▲ read historical stories, myths, legends, and fables to learn how
individuals have solved problems, made important contributions,
and influenced the lives of others
▲ listen to historical narratives about the history of children and
families in different cultures throughout the world to learn about
different family structures; children’s, women’s, and men’s roles;
daily life; religious or spiritual beliefs and practices; customs and
traditions
▲ read biographies about famous historical figures, focusing on their
personal lives, goals, and accomplishments and the effects of their
achievements on the lives of others
▲ write historical narratives in the form of letters, diary accounts,
or news reports from the point of view of a child who lived during
a particular historic time period and who witnessed an important
event or development
▲ listen to and participate in classroom debates and discussions of
important myths, legends, people, and events in world history;
determine admirable traits and identify examples of courage.

4. The skills of historical analysis include the ability to
investigate differing and competing interpretations of
the theories of history, hypothesize about why
interpretations change over time, explain the
importance of historical evidence, and understand the
concepts of change and continuity over time.
Students:
• consider different interpretations of key events and
developments in world history and understand the
differences in these accounts
• explore the lifestyles, beliefs, traditions, rules and laws,
and social/cultural needs and wants of people during
different periods in history and in different parts of the
world
• view historic events through the eyes of those who were
there, as shown in their art, writings, music, and
artifacts.

This is evident, for example, when students:
▲ explain different perspectives on the same phenomenon by
reading myths from several civilizations, recognizing the
different ways those people explained the same phenomenon
(e.g., how the world was created)
▲ listen to historical stories, biographies, or narratives to identify
who was involved, what events occurred, where the events took
place, and the outcomes or consequences
▲ list analytical questions to guide their investigations of
historical documents, pictures, diary accounts, artifacts, and
other records of the past
▲ construct picture timelines that show important events in their
own lives, including descriptions of the events and explanations
of why they were important.

STANDARD 2

9

Standard 2—World History
Intermediate

1. The study of world history requires an
understanding of world cultures and civilizations,
including an analysis of important ideas, social and
cultural values, beliefs, and traditions. This study also
examines the human condition and the connections
and interactions of people across time and space and
the ways different people view the same event or issue
from a variety of perspectives.
Students:
• know the social and economic characteristics, such as
customs, traditions, child-rearing practices, ways of
making a living, education and socialization practices,
gender roles, foods, and religious and spiritual beliefs
that distinguish different cultures and civilizations
• know some important historic events and developments
of past civilizations
• interpret and analyze documents and artifacts related to
significant developments and events in world history.

This is evident, for example, when students:
▲ propose a list of characteristics to define the concepts of culture
and civilization, explaining how civilizations develop and change
▲ investigate the important achievements and accomplishments of
the world’s early civilizations (e.g., African, Greek, Roman,
Egyptian, Indian, Chinese)
▲ analyze how the natural environments of the Tigris-Euphrates,
Nile, and Indus valleys shaped the early development of
civilization (Taken from National Standards for World History)
▲ research an important event or development in world history
and include information about how different people viewed the
same event (e.g., the French Revolution as witnessed by
members of the ruling classes, the revolutionaries, members of
the Estates General, and the Church)
▲ identify different ethnic, religious, and socioeconomic groups
throughout the world and analyze their varying perspectives on
the same historic events and contemporary issues. Explain how
these different perspectives developed.

Key ideas are identified by numbers (1).
Performance indicators are identified by bullets (•).
Sample tasks are identified by triangles (▲).

10

2. Establishing timeframes, exploring different
periodizations, examining themes across time and
within cultures, and focusing on important turning
points in world history help organize the study of
world cultures and civilizations.
Students:
• develop timelines by placing important events and devel­
opments in world history in their correct chronological
order
• measure time periods by years, decades, centuries, and
millennia
• study about major turning points in world history by
investigating the causes and other factors that brought
about change and the results of these changes.

This is evident, for example, when students:
▲ construct multiple-tier timelines that display a number of
important historic events that occurred at the same time or
during the same period of time (e.g., age of exploration and
contact showing events in Europe, Africa, and the Americas)
▲ present historical narratives that link together a series of events
in the correct chronological order
▲ recognize the reasons for periodizing history and know some
designations of historical periods; discuss the usefulness of the
following historical periods:
- The beginnings of Human Society
- Early Civilizations to 1000 BC
- Classical Traditions, Major Religions, and Giant Empires,
1000 BC-300 AD
- Expanding Zones of Exchange and Encounter, 300-1000 AD
- Intensified Hemispheric Interactions, 1000-1500
- Emergence of the First Global Age, 1450-1770
- The Age of Revolutions, 1750-1914
- The Twentieth Century.
(Adapted from National Standards for World History)

STANDARD 2

Students will use a variety of intellectual skills to demonstrate their understanding
of major ideas, eras, themes, developments, and turning points in world history and
examine the broad sweep of history from a variety of perspectives.
Intermediate

3. Study of the major social, political, cultural, and
religious developments in world history involves
learning about the important roles and contributions
of individuals and groups.
Students:
• investigate the roles and contributions of individuals and
groups in relation to key social, political, cultural, and
religious practices throughout world history
• interpret and analyze documents and artifacts related to
significant developments and events in world history
• classify historic information according to the type of
activity or practice: social/cultural, political, economic,
geographic, scientific, technological, and historic.

This is evident, for example, when students:
▲ read historic narratives, biographies, literature, diaries, and
letters to learn about the important accomplishments and roles
played by individuals and groups throughout world history
▲ explain some of the following practices as found in particular
civilizations and cultures throughout world history: social
customs, child-rearing practices, government, ways of making a
living and distributing goods and services, language and
literature, education and socialization practices, values and
traditions, gender roles, foods, and religious/spiritual beliefs and
practices
▲ develop a map of Europe, the Mediterranean world, India, South
and Southeast Asia, and China to show the extent of the spread
of Buddhism, Christianity, Hinduism, and Confucianism; explain
how the spread of these religions changed the lives of people
living in these areas of the world (Adapted from National
Standards for World History)
▲ write diary accounts, journal entries, letters, or news accounts
from the point of view of a young person living during a
particular time period in world history, focusing on an important
historic, political, economic, or religious event or
accomplishment
▲ study the historical writings of important figures in world
history to learn about their goals, motivations, intentions,
influences, and strengths and weaknesses.

STANDARD 2

4. The skills of historical analysis include the ability to
investigate differing and competing interpretations of
the theories of history, hypothesize about why
interpretations change over time, explain the
importance of historical evidence, and understand the
concepts of change and continuity over time.
Students:
• explain the literal meaning of a historical passage or
primary source document, identifying who was involved,
what happened, where it happened, what events led up
to these developments, and what consequences or
outcomes followed (Taken from National Standards for
World History)
• analyze different interpretations of important events and
themes in world history and explain the various frames
of reference expressed by different historians
• view history through the eyes of those who witnessed key
events and developments in world history by analyzing
their literature, diary accounts, letters, artifacts, art,
music, architectural drawings, and other documents
• investigate important events and developments in world
history by posing analytical questions, selecting relevant
data, distinguishing fact from opinion, hypothesizing
cause-and-effect relationships, testing these hypotheses,
and forming conclusions.

This is evident, for example, when students:
▲ examine documents related to significant developments in world
history (e.g., excerpts from sacred texts of the world’s great
religions, important political statements or decrees, literary
works, and historians’ commentaries); employ the skills of
historical analysis and interpretation in probing the meaning
and importance of the documents by:
- identifying authors and sources for the historical
documents
- comparing and contrasting differing sets of ideals and
values contained in each historical document
- considering multiple perspectives presented in the
documents
- evaluating major debates among historians about the
meaning of each historical document
- hypothesizing about the influence of each document on
present-day activities and debates in the international
arena. (Adapted from National Standards in World History)
▲ study about an event or development in world history (e.g., the
early civilizations, the age of exchange and global expansion, the
industrial revolution, political and social revolutions,
imperialism and colonization, case studies of genocide and
human rights violations, world wars) by analyzing accounts
written by eyewitnesses to the event or development; compare
the eyewitness accounts with reports and narratives written by
historians after the event or development
▲ trace the impacts of different technological innovations and
advances ( e.g., in transportation and communication, agriculture,
health and science, commerce and industry) over time by
analyzing the effects of technology on the lives of people.

11

Standard 2—World History
Commencement

1. The study of world history requires an
understanding of world cultures and civilizations,
including an analysis of important ideas, social and
cultural values, beliefs, and traditions. This study also
examines the human condition and the connections
and interactions of people across time and space, and
the ways different people view the same event or issue
from a variety of perspectives.
Students:
• define culture and civilization, explaining how they
developed and changed over time. Investigate the various
components of cultures and civilizations including social
customs, norms, values, and traditions; political systems;
economic systems; religions and spiritual beliefs; and
socialization or educational practices
• understand the development and connectedness of
Western civilization and other civilizations and cultures
in many areas of the world and over time
• analyze historic events from around the world by
examining accounts written from different perspectives
• understand the broad patterns, relationships, and
interactions of cultures and civilizations during
particular eras and across eras
• analyze changing and competing interpretations of issues,
events, and developments throughout world history.

2. Establishing timeframes, exploring different
periodizations, examining themes across time and
within cultures, and focusing on important turning
points in world history help organize the study of
world cultures and civilizations.
Students:
• distinguish between the past, present, and future by
creating multiple-tier timelines that display important
events and developments from world history across time
and place
• evaluate the effectiveness of different models for the
periodization of important historic events, identifying
the reasons why a particular sequence for these events
was chosen
• analyze evidence critically and demonstrate an
understanding of how circumstances of time and place
influence perspective
• explain the importance of analyzing narratives drawn
from different times and places to understand historical
events
• investigate key events and developments and major
turning points in world history to identify the factors
that brought about change and the long-term effects of
these changes.

This is evident, for example, when students:
This is evident, for example, when students:
▲ analyze important events and developments in world history
through the eyes and experiences of those who were there, as
reported in their literature, diaries, letters, debates, art and music,
and artifacts (Taken from National Standards for World History)
▲ compare two or more historical interpretations of an important
event in world history, differentiate fact from opinion, and deter­
mine which facts are most significant in the historian’s judgment
and why (Taken from National Standards for World History)
▲ explain how an important event or development from world history
can be viewed from multiple perspectives, noting how different
values, motives, beliefs, frames of reference, and perspectives
influence interpretations of the past
▲ use dramatizations, timelines, debates, and other research reports to
explain how different observations of the same event or issue develop
▲ analyze important developments and turning points in world
history; hypothesize what might have happened if decisions or
circumstances had been different; investigate such developments
and turning points as:
-the development of the early civilizations
-the development of the Roman Empire
-the emergence of the world’s great religions: Buddhism,
Christianity, Hinduism, Islam, Judaism, and Taoism
-the rise of the Mongol Empire in China
-the Mali Empire in West Africa
-the age of exploration and the age of enlightenment
-the rise and fall of European colonialism
-global interactions and migration
-the formation and unification of major European nations
(Germany, Italy, Great Britain, and France)
-the emergence and global influence of American civilization.

12

▲ develop composite timelines for different areas of the world (e.g.,
the Middle East, South and Southeast Asia, Africa south of the
Sahara, the Americas), showing important events at any given
time
▲ discuss models for periodizing events from world history, the
development of the major civilizations, and the history of other
cultures throughout the world. Explain the underlying
principles for these models and make a case for why others
might want to periodize these events differently
▲ analyze historical narratives, biographies, or stories to
determine their temporal structure. Select an important event
from world history and follow it forward over time to determine
its consequences and trace it backward to identify its causes
▲ construct timelines that display key events and developments in
world history and which describe the important facts about the
event/development and link the event/development to other
important events which took place somewhere else in the world
▲ analyzing historical narratives about the movements of people
and ideas over time and place, including reports about the
beginnings of human society in Africa, Mesopotamia, Indus, and
China.
Key ideas are identified by numbers (1).
Performance indicators are identified by bullets (•).
Sample tasks are identified by triangles (▲).

STANDARD 2

Students will use a variety of intellectual skills to demonstrate their understanding
of major ideas, eras, themes, developments, and turning points in world history and
examine the broad sweep of history from a variety of perspectives.
Commencement

3. Study of the major social, political, cultural, and
religious developments in world history involves
learning about the important roles and contributions
of individuals and groups.
Students:
• analyze the roles and contributions of individuals and
groups to social, political, economic, cultural, and
religious practices and activities
• explain the dynamics of cultural change and how
interactions between and among cultures has affected
various cultural groups throughout the world
• examine the social/cultural, political, economic, and
religious norms and values of Western and other world
cultures.

This is evident, for example, when students:
▲ investigate how groups of people living in different geographic
regions throughout the world (e.g., Africa, the Middle East,
Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union, China) interacted
with and structured their natural environments to accommodate
their varied lifestyles
▲ prepare narratives that describe important historic events and
developments (e.g., beginnings of human societies; global
exploration and expansion; scientific, technological, and
intellectual achievements; social and political reform; revolution;
case studies of genocide and human rights violations) from the
perspectives of the individuals and groups who witnessed them
▲ investigate the lives of important political and social reformers
by describing the conditions they were attempting to improve
and evaluating the success of their efforts
▲ report on the spread of Christianity and Islam throughout world
history, identify regions where these religions spread, and
describe the effects on the lives of the people who lived in these
regions
▲ trace the experiences of different emigrant groups throughout
world history, identify the factors that caused these groups to
leave their homelands, and describe the social and economic
effects on their new homelands.

STANDARD 2

4. The skills of historical analysis include the ability to
investigate differing and competing interpretations of
the theories of history, hypothesize about why
interpretations change over time, explain the
importance of historical evidence, and understand the
concepts of change and continuity over time.
Students:
• identify historical problems, pose analytical questions or
hypotheses, research analytical questions or test
hypotheses, formulate conclusions or generalizations,
raise new questions or issues for further investigation
• interpret and analyze documents and artifacts related to
significant developments and events in world history
• plan and organize historical research projects related to
regional or global interdependence
• analyze different interpretations of important events,
issues, or developments in world history by studying the
social, political, and economic context in which they
were developed; by testing the data source for reliability
and validity, credibility, authority, authenticity, and
completeness; and by detecting bias, distortion of the
facts, and propaganda by omission, suppression, or
invention of facts. (Taken from National Standards for
World History)

This is evident, for example, when students:
▲ complete historical/social science research projects focusing on
topics and issues drawn from world history; organize data
according to the following activities: social, political, economic,
cultural, and religious; consider multiple perspectives in
interpreting the past and explain how different motives, beliefs,
interests, and perspectives influence interpretations of the past
(Adapted from National Standards for World History)
▲ apply the skills of historiography by analyzing different
interpretations of key events and developments in world history
(e.g., the development of the world’s great empires; the
emergence of feudalism; encounters between Europeans and the
peoples of sub-Saharan Africa, Asia, and the Americas;
nationalism and its global effects). Analyze competing narratives
by comparing and contrasting historians’ selection of analytical
questions, frames of reference, and values/beliefs to show how
different interpretations develop
▲ evaluate the validity and credibility of historical interpretations,
including new or changing interpretations that have developed
as new information about events or developments in world
history is learned, and new interpretations and methodologies
are developed (Taken from National Standards for World
History)
▲ complete social science research projects focusing on topics and
issues drawn from world history (e.g., causes of major
revolutions, effects of imperialism, causes and consequences of
the Industrial Revolution, social reform movements, and global
consequences of World Wars I and II). Consider multiple
perspectives in interpreting past events and describe how
different values, frames of reference, beliefs, and motives
influence interpretations of topics and issues.

13

Standard 3—Geography
Elementary

1. Geography can be divided into six essential
elements which can be used to analyze important
historic, geographic, economic, and environmental
questions and issues. These six elements include: the
world in spatial terms, places and regions, physical
settings (including natural resources), human systems,
environment and society, and the use of geography.
(Adapted from The National Geography Standards,
1994: Geography for Life)
Students:
• study about how people live, work, and utilize natural
resources
• draw maps and diagrams that serve as representations of
places, physical features, and objects
• locate places within the local community, State, and
nation; locate the Earth’s continents in relation to each
other and to principal parallels and meridians. (Adpated
from National Geography Standards, 1994)
• identify and compare the physical, human, and cultural
characteristics of different regions and people (Adapted
from National Geography Standards, 1994)
• investigate how people depend on and modify the
physical environment.

This is evident, for example, when students:
▲ draw simple maps of their communities or regions showing the
major landmarks, industries, residential areas, business
districts, transportation networks, health and educational
facilities, and recreation areas
▲ examine different kinds of maps to identify and define their
components, including key, title, legend, cardinal and
intermediate directions, scale, and grid
▲ use cardboard, wood, clay, or other materials to make a model of
their community or region showing their physical characteristics
(Taken from National Geography Standards, 1994)
▲ read about children living in other cultures to learn about their
customs, beliefs, and traditions; natural resource use; food;
shelter; socialization and schooling; and other important
components of culture
▲ draw maps and pictures showing how people make use of and
modify their physical environments (e.g., land use for
agriculture, mining, residential developments, transportation
networks, recreation).

Key ideas are identified by numbers (1).
Performance indicators are identified by bullets (•).
Sample tasks are identified by triangles (▲).

14

2. Geography requires the development and
application of the skills of asking and answering
geographic questions; analyzing theories of geography;
and acquiring, organizing, and analyzing geographic
information. (Adapted from: The National Geography
Standards, 1994: Geography for Life)
Students:
• ask geographic questions about where places are located;
why they are located where they are; what is important
about their locations; and how their locations are related
to the location of other people and places (Adapted from
National Geography Standards, 1994)
• gather and organize geographic information from a
variety of sources and display in a number of ways
• analyze geographic information by making relationships,
interpreting trends and relationships, and analyzing
geographic data. (Adapted from National Geography
Standards, 1994)

This is evident, for example, when students:
▲ read historical narratives and talk about the importance of
where places are located, try to determine why they are located
where they are, and assess the relationship of location to other
locations and people in the story
▲ use a map grid (e.g., latitude and longitude or an
alphanumerical system) to answer questions about location and
place
▲ use different types of map scales (linear, fractional, and word) to
measure the distance between two places
▲ map the locations of places in the community or region, using
appropriate symbols (e.g., dots or points for cities and towns;
different shapes for residential and business areas; lines for
transportation networks)
▲ present oral and written reports using maps, charts, tables,
graphs, and other visual displays showing spatial relationships,
locations, and other geographic information.

STANDARD 3

Students will use a variety of intellectual skills to demonstrate their understanding
of the geography of the interdependent world in which we live—local, national, and
global—including the distribution of people, places, and environments over the
Earth’s surface.
Intermediate

1. Geography can be divided into six essential elements
which can be used to analyze important historic,
geographic, economic, and environmental questions
and issues. These six elements include: the world in
spatial terms, places and regions, physical settings
(including natural resources), human systems, envi­
ronment and society, and the use of geography.
(Adapted from The National Geography Standards,
1994: Geography for Life)
Students:
• map information about people, places, and environments
• understand the characteristics, functions, and
applications of maps, globes, aerial and other
photographs, satellite-produced images, and models
(Taken from National Geography Standards, 1994)
• investigate why people and places are located where they
are located and what patterns can be perceived in these
locations
• describe the relationships between people and
environments and the connections between people and
places.

2. Geography requires the development and
application of the skills of asking and answering
geographic questions; analyzing theories of geography;
and acquiring, organizing, and analyzing geographic
information. (Adapted from The National Geography
Standards, 1994: Geography for Life)
Students:
• formulate geographic questions and define geographic
issues and problems
• use a number of research skills (e.g., computer databases,
periodicals, census reports, maps, standard reference
works, interviews, surveys) to locate and gather
geographical information about issues and problems
(Adapted from National Geography Standards, 1994)
• present geographic information in a variety of formats,
including maps, tables, graphs, charts, diagrams, and
computer-generated models
• interpret geographic information by synthesizing data
and developing conclusions and generalizations about
geographic issues and problems.

This is evident, for example, when students:
This is evident, for example, when students:
▲ investigate how groups of people living in different geographic
regions throughout the world interacted with and structured
their natural environments to accommodate their varied
lifestyles and economies; discuss national, regional, and global
interactions
▲ draw from memory a map of the world on a single sheet of paper
and outline and label the major physical features (e.g.,
continents, oceans, major mountain ranges, significant desert
regions, and river systems) and important human features (e.g.,
major cities of the world, imaginary lines such as the prime
meridian and the equator). (Taken from National Geography
Standards, 1994)
▲ apply the five themes of geography to their study of
communities and regions throughout the world. Describe how
location, place, relationships within places, movement, and
regions can be used to analyze different cultures and societies
▲ complete a geographic/historic study of their community or a
region of New York State by focusing on the following questions:
Where is your community or region located? How did it get
there? What is it like to live and work there? What are its
physical characteristics (e.g., climate, elevation, population
density, size)?

▲ plan and execute an inquiry to answer these questions about a
region of the world: How does the shape of the Earth and the
natural environment influence where people live? What natural
processes change the shape of the Earth’s surface? How has
human habitation changed the surface of the Earth? Derive
generalizations and conclusions supported by evidence. (Based
on National Geography Standards, 1994)
▲ pose analytical questions concerning a geographic issue or
problem affecting their community, region, or New York State
(e.g., issues related to environmental problems and concerns,
transportation and traffic needs, land use, housing, natural
resource use)
▲ use a variety of research skills to locate, collect, and organize
geographic data related to a geographic or environmental issue,
problem, or question; organize the data in logical and
meaningful ways; present written and oral reports that include
geographic conclusions and generalizations supported by the
data collected; propose new questions for further investigation
▲ develop and present a multimedia report on a geographic topic,
issue, problem, or question (e.g., deforestation, energy
consumption, resource depletion, natural hazards, major
geographic events), making use of maps, graphs, photographs,
videos, computer-generated models, and other appropriate
sources
▲ use a variety of maps to answer geographic questions about
people, places, and regions.

STANDARD 3

15

Standard 3—Geography
Commencement

1. Geography can be divided into six essential
elements which can be used to analyze important
historic, geographic, economic, and environmental
questions and issues. These six elements include: the
world in spatial terms, places and regions, physical
settings (including natural resources), human systems,
environment and society, and the use of geography.
(Adapted from The National Geography Standards,
1994: Geography for Life)
Students:
• understand how to develop and use maps and other
graphic representations to display geographic issues,
problems, and questions
• describe the physical characteristics of the Earth’s
surface and investigate the continual reshaping of the
surface by physical processes and human activities
• investigate the characteristics, distribution, and
migration of human populations on the Earth’s surface
(Taken from National Geography Standards, 1994)
• understand the development and interactions of
social/cultural, political, economic, and religious systems
in different regions of the world
• analyze how the forces of cooperation and conflict
among people influence the division and control of the
Earth’s surface (Taken from National Geography
Standards, 1994)
• explain how technological change affects people, places,
and regions.

This is evident, for example, when students:
▲ evaluate the applications of geographic tools and supporting
technologies to serve particular purposes by collecting,
comparing, and explaining the significance of maps from
different sources and different points of view to illustrate the
same phenomena. (Taken from National Geography Standards,

▲ complete an in-depth geographic study of a world region by
analyzing demographic data (e.g., birth rate, literacy rates for
females, infant mortality) and draw conclusions about the
influence of these factors on the characteristics of that region;
for example, study migration patterns and culture change in
and around large cities in Europe, Africa, Latin America, and
Asia, with a focus on cities near international borders and in
major manufacturing centers; explain how different cultural
groups shape the character of these cities and how culture
influences conflict, cooperation, and group identity. (Based on
National Geography Standards, 1994)
▲ draw from memory a map of the world; outline the relative
location of continents, oceans, major river systems, nations in
the news, and important cities
▲ demonstrate the ability to interpret sophisticated information
about people, places, and regions; use a topographical map to
lay out a five-mile hike through the countryside or local
community; note such items as elevation, slope, distance,
direction, and geographic features along the route. (Taken from

National Geography Standards, 1994)
▲ explain the relationship between the geographic setting
(ecosystems, spatial distribution of resources, ease of
transportation and communication) and the spatial development
of societies (e.g., how Africa’s physical geography, vegetation,
and technology affect cross-cultural contacts and economic
development; the relationship between topography and drainage
systems in China and the development of civilization there; the
impact of Japan’s insular geography upon its history, cultural
identity, and patterns of selective borrowing from other cultures;
the impact of the diversity of the physical environment,
including the range of climates, in Latin America; the effects of
the lack of water on the historic and economic development of
the Middle East; the relationship between the physical
geography and the historic and economic development of
Eastern Europe and Russia; and the influence of the frontier in
United States history).

1994)
▲ choose and give reasons for using different technologies to
analyze selected geographic problems. Use aerial photographs,
satellite-produced imagery, and geographic information systems
(GIS) to define, analyze, and propose solutions to global
environmental problems (e.g., deforestation, overpopulation,
water pollution, resource depletion)

Key ideas are identified by numbers (1).
Performance indicators are identified by bullets (•).
Sample tasks are identified by triangles (▲).

16

STANDARD 3

Students will use a variety of intellectual skills to demonstrate their understanding
of the geography of the interdependent world in which we live—local, national, and
global—including the distribution of people, places, and environments over the
Earth’s surface.
Commencement

2. Geography requires the development and
application of the skills of asking and answering
geographic questions; analyzing theories of geography;
and acquiring, organizing, and analyzing geographic
information. (Adapted from The National Geography
Standards, 1994 Geography for Life)
Students:
• plan, organize, and present geographic research projects
• locate and gather geographic information from a variety
of primary and secondary sources (Taken from National
Geography Standards, 1994)
• select and design maps, graphs, tables, charts, diagrams,
and other graphic representations to present geographic
information
• analyze geographic information by developing and test­
ing inferences and hypotheses, and formulating conclu­
sions from maps, photographs, computer models, and
other geographic representations (Adapted from
National Geography Standards, 1994)
• develop and test generalizations and conclusions and
pose analytical questions based on the results of geo­
graphic inquiry.

This is evident, for example, when students:
▲ examine a collection of maps, photographs, satellite-produced
images, databases, graphs, firsthand accounts, and other
sources to generate questions and pose problems for
investigation
▲ organize primary and secondary geographic sources to
investigate local, national, and international environmental
problems and issues; determine the many perspectives that
individuals and groups advocate as they seek to resolve these
problems or issues; apply a geographic perspective along with
others in reaching conclusions on the issues. (Based on National
Geography Standards, 1994)
▲ analyze geographic information contained in a spatial database
or geographic information system (GIS) to answer questions
concerning land use, economic development, population shifts,
and transportation networks
▲ use maps showing family income, transportation systems,
natural resources, recreation areas, educational and health
facilities and other data to develop hypotheses about why some
regions prosper and others do not (Adapted from National
Geography Standards, 1994)
▲ use a variety of research skills to locate and collect descriptive
and statistical data and to use the data and maps to collect and
compile information (e.g., the use of specific purpose maps to
show various geographic aspects of the Earth’s surface and
explain the geographic variables that serve as criteria for
grouping countries into regions; the use of technology to
moderate geographic condition)

▲ complete a geographic study of a world region, analyzing
demographic data (e.g., birth rate, literacy rates for females,
infant mortality) to determine how groups and cultures
influence the characteristics of that region. For example, study
migration patterns and cultural change in and around large
cities in Europe, Africa, Latin America, and Asia, focusing on
cities near international borders and in major manufacturing
centers. Explain how different cultural groups shape the
character of these cities and how culture influences conflict,
cooperation, and group identity. (Adapted from National

Geography Standards, 1994)
▲ identify the characteristics and distribution of ecosystems, and
the changes in meaning, distribution, and importance of
resources (e.g., how Africa’s physical geography, vegetation, and
technology affect cross-cultural contacts and economic
development; the relationship between topography and drainage
systems in China and the development of civilization there; the
impact of Japan’s insular geography upon its history, cultural
identity, and patterns of selective borrowing from other cultures;
the diversity of the physical environment, including the
tremendous range of climates, in areas referred to as Latin
America; the effects physical geography—especially the lack of
water—have upon the historic and economic development of the
Middle East; the relationship between the physical geography
and the historic and economic development of Eastern Europe
and Russia; and the influence of the frontier in United States
history).

STANDARD 3

17

Standard 4—Economics
Elementary

1. The study of economics requires an understanding
of major economic concepts and systems, the
principles of economic decision making, and the
interdependence of economies and economic systems
throughout the world.
Students:
• know some ways individuals and groups attempt to
satisfy their basic needs and wants by utilizing scarce
resources
• explain how people’s wants exceed their limited
resources and that this condition defines scarcity
• know that scarcity requires individuals to make choices
and that these choices involve costs
• study about how the availability and distribution of
resources is important to a nation’s economic growth
• understand how societies organize their economies to
answer three fundamental economic questions: What
goods and services shall be produced and in what
quantities ? How shall goods and services be produced?
For whom shall goods and services be produced?
• investigate how production, distribution, exchange, and
consumption of goods and services are economic
decisions with which all societies and nations must deal.

▲ organize information based on interviews of a laborer, a service
provider, a small business owner, a banker, a business executive,
an elected government official, or a government employee to
identify how individuals produce and distribute goods and
services, why individuals make the kinds of decisions they make,
and how individuals describe the effects of their decisions on
others
▲ observe economic characteristics of places; draw conclusions
about how people in families, schools, and communities all over
the world must depend on others to help them meet their needs
and wants.

This is evident, for example, when students:
▲ role-play a family or group situation in which group members
make an economic decision about whether to purchase a new
car, plan a family or group trip, or invest the money
▲ discuss the differences between capital, human, and natural
resources and classify pictures of each resource type in the
appropriate category
▲ use map symbols to locate and identify natural resources found
in different regions of the United States and in other countries
in the Western Hemisphere
▲ identify several personal as well as family buying choices, list
their associated costs and benefits, and explain how and why
particular decisions are/have been made; clarify how prices and
one’s own values influence individual and family decision mak­
ing
▲ describe the characteristics of at least two of the following
economic units: a family, a worker, a small business, a labor
union, a large corporation, a government agency (local, state, or
national); identify the kinds of economic choices each economic
unit must make and explain the positive and negative results of
at least one choice

Key ideas are identified by numbers (1).
Performance indicators are identified by bullets (•).
Sample tasks are identified by triangles (▲).

18

STANDARD 4

Students will use a variety of intellectual skills to demonstrate their understanding of how the United
States and other societies develop economic systems and associated institutions to allocate scarce
resources, how major decision-making units function in the U.S. and other national economies, and how
an economy solves the scarcity problem through market and nonmarket mechanisms.
Elementary

2. Economics requires the development and
application of the skills needed to make informed and
well-reasoned economic decisions in daily and
national life.
Students:
• locate economic information, using card catalogues,
computer databases, indices, and library guides
• collect economic information from textbooks, standard
references, newspapers, periodicals, and other primary
and secondary sources
• make hypotheses about economic issues and problems,
testing, refining, and eliminating hypotheses and
developing new ones when necessary
• present economic information by developing charts,
tables, diagrams, and simple graphs.

This is evident, for example, when students:
▲ collect and discuss newspaper articles about economic issues
and problems affecting their community, region, or the State
▲ design a display board showing how they might acquire and
spend income
▲ research a local industry to determine what it produces, how it
makes this product, its distribution system, and how the
finished product is marketed
▲ analyze a set of graphs or tables showing selected imports and
exports for the United States to make hypotheses about what
might happen if these imports or exports increase or decrease in
value
▲ use a variety of textbooks and news articles to identify a list of
potential economic problems or issues facing the United States
or other nations in the Western Hemisphere. Working in groups,
brainstorm a list of possible solutions, the potential effects of
these solutions, and rank order the solutions in terms of their
likelihood of success.

STANDARD 4

19

Standard 4—Economics
Intermediate

1. The study of economics requires an understanding
of major economic concepts and systems, the
principles of economic decision making, and the
interdependence of economies and economic systems
throughout the world.
Students:
• explain how societies and nations attempt to satisfy their
basic needs and wants by utilizing scarce capital,
natural, and human resources
• define basic economic concepts such as scarcity, supply
and demand, markets, opportunity costs, resources,
productivity, economic growth, and systems
• understand how scarcity requires people and nations to
make choices which involve costs and future
considerations
• understand how people in the United States and
throughout the world are both producers and consumers
of goods and services
• investigate how people in the United States and
throughout the world answer the three fundamental
economic questions and solve basic economic problems
• describe how traditional, command, market, and mixed
economies answer the three fundamental economic
questions
• explain how nations throughout the world have joined
with one another to promote economic development and
growth.

▲ identify the basic ideas and values of the United States
economic system (e.g., individual entrepreneurship, private
ownership of property, laissez-faire economics, cheap labor
supply, free enterprise, monopolies, and governmental
regulation) and how these factors contributed to the American
economic system; compare these ideas and values to those of
other economic systems
▲ define and apply the concepts of inflation, deflation, depression,
fiscal policies, and monetary policy in the context in which these
terms are used; examine the historical context of at least one of
these concepts during an important event in United States
history (e.g., industrialization of America and the rise of the
labor movement, the Great Depression, the 1970s inflation)
▲ develop a case study of a New York-produced product to show
how the State participates in a world economy
▲ investigate the economy of the United States and determine
how decisions are made about what goods and services are to be
produced, and how they are distributed; compare how these
decisions are made in other countries; identify the major
imports/exports of the country and explain the effects of
international trade on the American and other national
economies; discuss how values may influence the economy.

This is evident, for example, when students:
▲ investigate how different countries in Europe and the Middle
East solve problems related to satisfying basic needs. Compile a
list of available resources, industries, modes of transportation,
and economic problems
▲ define and apply basic economic concepts such as supply and
demand, price, market, and economic growth in an investigation
of a national or regional economic question or problem
▲ understand the concept of opportunity cost (the highest valued
alternative not chosen) and how the concept applies to personal
and business decision making
▲ consider case studies comparing economic decisions and choices
made by groups and nations involving questions about scarce
resources
▲ compare basic economic systems throughout the world,
classifying them as traditional, command, market, or mixed.
Focus on questions such as: What is produced? How is it
produced, distributed, and consumed? Which natural, capital,
and human resources are available? How are prices set? What is
meant by economic growth?

Key ideas are identified by numbers (1).
Performance indicators are identified by bullets (•).
Sample tasks are identified by triangles (▲).

20

STANDARD 4

Students will use a variety of intellectual skills to demonstrate their understanding of how the United
States and other societies develop economic systems and associated institutions to allocate scarce
resources, how major decision-making units function in the U.S. and other national economies, and
how an economy solves the scarcity problem through market and nonmarket mechanisms.
Intermediate

2. Economics requires the development and
application of the skills needed to make informed and
well-reasoned economic decisions in daily and
national life.
Students:
• identify and collect economic information from standard
reference works, newspapers, periodicals, computer
databases, textbooks, and other primary and secondary
sources
• organize and classify economic information by distin­
guishing relevant from irrelevant information, placing
ideas in chronological order, and selecting appropriate
labels for data
• evaluate economic data by differentiating fact from opin­
ion and identifying frames of reference
• develop conclusions about economic issues and problems
by creating broad statements which summarize findings
and solutions
• present economic information by using media and other
appropriate visuals such as tables, charts, and graphs to
communicate ideas and conclusions.

This is evident, for example, when students:
▲ research a number of economic conditions (e.g., availability of
resources, size and distribution of population, degree of
technology, political structure) about a particular nation in
Europe, Africa, or the Middle East
▲ organize economic information about different kinds of economic
systems (i.e., traditional, market, command) in terms of what to
produce, how to produce it, and for whom to produce the product
▲ investigate different societies and groups living in Africa, Asia,
and the Middle East to determine their available resources,
industries, and problems in meeting basic needs. List
alternative ways to resolve their economic problems and
evaluate the effectiveness of each proposed solution
▲ design a class-size mural that shows how people living in
Europe, Asia, and Africa produce and consume various
resources, goods, and services. Indicate how these ways of
making a living have changed over time
▲ research a major United States industry such as steel,
automobile, mining, farming, or banking to determine the
governmental controls placed on it either directly or indirectly.
Determine the extent to which the federal government interacts
with and controls these industries
▲ prepare a classroom questionnaire that asks the
historical/economic question: What makes a nation an
industrial leader? Survey adults to determine their opinions on
the question, categorize the findings, and draw conclusions.

STANDARD 4

21

Standard 4—Economics
Commencement

1. The study of economics requires an understanding
of major economic concepts and systems, the
principles of economic decision making, and the
interdependence of economies and economic systems
throughout the world.
Students:
• analyze the effectiveness of varying ways societies,
nations, and regions of the world attempt to satisfy their
basic needs and wants by utilizing scarce resources
• define and apply basic economic concepts such as
scarcity, supply/demand, opportunity costs, production,
resources, money and banking, economic growth,
markets, costs, competition, and world economic systems
• understand the nature of scarcity and how nations of the
world make choices which involve economic and social
costs and benefits
• describe the ideals, principles, structure, practices,
accomplishments, and problems related to the United
States economic system
• compare and contrast the United States economic system
with other national economic systems, focusing on the
three fundamental economic questions
• explain how economic decision making has become
global as a result of an interdependent world economy
• understand the roles in the economic system of
consumers, producers, workers, investors, and voters.

This is evident, for example, when students:
▲ through the use of market case studies of the U.S. economy and
the economies of other countries, investigate how values and
incentives influence people’s choices, how the economic system
affects people’s incentives, how people gain from voluntary
trade, and how people’s choices influence the value of a good or
service
▲ examine current and historical economic data (e.g., workforce
composition and participation, natural resource deposits,
industrial base, financial institutions, state’s gross domestic
product) to create an economic profile of the New York State and
United States economies; investigate the role of government
(state and national) with particular attention to services
provided that foster economic activity and regulations designed
to protect the environment
▲ complete a case study of a nation or society, focusing on the
fundamental economic questions: What goods and services are
produced and in what quantities? How are these goods and
services produced? For whom are these goods and services
produced?

Key ideas are identified by numbers (1).
Performance indicators are identified by bullets (•).
Sample tasks are identified by triangles (▲).

22

▲ investigate one or more current economic issues in the United
States, including their historical antecedents; issues may
include, but are not limited to: impact of fiscal policy, the role of
Federal Reserve and monetary policy, corporate downsizing and
unemployment, economic growth and the information age,
welfare policy, health care policy, the national debt, defense
spending, foreign aid, affirmative action; consider policy
positions, and the possible conflicting goals of government, such
as full employment, price stability, economic justice, economic
freedom, and economic security
▲ recognize why international trade takes place (because of
comparative advantage) and the role of exchange rates in
fostering or inhibiting trade; become familiar with the basics of
the balance of payments and international capital flows;
investigate the importance of New York City as a primary world
financial center and how the City’s financial role is enhanced by
technology
▲ graph textbook or teacher-developed data to display
supply/demand schedules. Interpret graphs identifying prices
and situations that would cause the demand and supply
schedules to change
▲ describe a list of economic decisions students will make during
the coming year, explaining how the concept of scarcity is
involved in each decision. For each decision, discuss a possible
opportunity cost involved. Research newspapers, periodicals,
and computer databases to compile a list of local, State, or
federal government economic decisions explaining how the
concept of scarcity affected each decision
▲ interpret and analyze the graphic information included in the
annual Economic Report of the President, describing federal and
state expenditures
▲ analyze how traditional, command, market, and mixed
economies would address the following issues: health care for
individuals with special needs (i.e., elderly, people with
disabilities), price supports for farmers, aid to education, and
environmental controls of industries
▲ examine the nature and functions of money in an economy;
understand the basics of banking, including the role of the
Federal Reserve Bank system; investigate how forms of money
and the nature of credit have changed over time; recognize how
technology increases the flow of financial information and
increases the speed of financial transactions
▲ conduct an in-depth investigation and analysis of the economic
and historical impact of one of the following: the era of Adam
Smith and the emergence of capitalism, the Industrial
Revolution, Karl Marx and the emergence of communism, the
fall of the Berlin Wall, the “opening up” of former communist
countries to capitalism, and how economic change has affected
families throughout history.

STANDARD 4

Students will use a variety of intellectual skills to demonstrate their understanding of how the United
States and other societies develop economic systems and associated institutions to allocate scarce
resources, how major decision-making units function in the U.S. and other national economies, and
how an economy solves the scarcity problem through market and nonmarket mechanisms.
Commencement

2. Economics requires the development and
application of the skills needed to make informed and
well-reasoned economic decisions in daily and
national life.
Students:
• identify, locate, and evaluate economic information from
standard reference works, newspapers, periodicals,
computer databases, monographs, textbooks, government
publications, and other primary and secondary sources
• use economic information by identifying similarities and
differences in trends; inferring relationships between
various elements of an economy: organizing and
arranging information in charts, tables, and graphs;
extrapolating and making conclusions about economic
questions, issues, and problems
• apply a problem-solving model to identify economic
problems or issues, generate hypotheses, test hypotheses,
investigate and analyze selected data, consider
alternative solutions or positions, and make decisions
about the best solution or position
• present economic information and conclusions in
different formats, including graphic representations,
computer models, research reports, and oral
presentations.

This is evident, for example, when students:
▲ analyze graphs and charts describing federal, state, and local
government expenditures in different categories (e.g., education,
police and fire, health care, welfare, transportation) and design
a graphic representation or computer model that compares/
contrasts these expenditures
▲ construct a personal budget showing how they would spend a
particular income for a period of months. Classify the
expenditures and present this information in graphic form
▲ research the early struggles of organized labor, including topics
such as labor conditions in specific industries in the nineteenth
century, important pieces of labor legislation, and major labor
conflicts. Prepare an oral or research report that summarizes
the findings and evaluates the effectiveness of the solutions to
these problems, conflicts, or conditions
▲ list problems which affect the environment and the quality of
life in the United States. Research federal, state, and local
government programs developed to resolve these problems.
Evaluate the costs and benefits of each governmental action and
propose additional actions
▲ prepare a series of questions for an interview with a commercial
banker focusing on the relationship of that bank with the
Federal Reserve System and how and why interest rates change.
Graph interest rates for a two-year period and explain how and
why they might have changed
▲ research periodicals, computer databases, and government
publications to investigate different views on the role of the
government in the economy. Take and defend a position on what
role government should play in managing the economy.

STANDARD 4

23

Standard 5—Civics, Citizenship, and
Government
Elementary

1. The study of civics, citizenship, and government
involves learning about political systems; the purposes
of government and civic life; and the differing
assumptions held by people across time and place
regarding power, authority, governance, and law.
(Adapted from The National Standards for Civics and
Government, 1994)
Students:
• know the meaning of key terms and concepts related to
government, including democracy, power, citizenship,
nation-state, and justice
• explain the probable consequences of the absence of
government and rules
• describe the basic purposes of government and the
importance of civic life
• understand that social and political systems are based
upon people’s beliefs
• discuss how and why the world is divided into nations
and what kinds of governments other nations have.

This is evident, for example, when students:
▲ create a chart on newsprint listing the reasons for creating
governments and the reasons why all groups and societies
create rules and laws
▲ create a class constitution and develop class rules
▲ role-play a day without rules or laws
▲ collect and discuss newspaper cartoons dealing with rules and
laws
▲ compile a list of different nations of the world and identify the
type of government each nation has
▲ compare governmental structures of the United States and
Canada, and selected nations of Latin America
▲ hold a mock trial focusing on situations that embody such
concepts as fairness, justice, or equality.

2. The state and federal governments established by
the Constitutions of the United States and the State of
New York embody basic civic values (such as justice,
honesty, self-discipline, due process, equality, majority
rule with respect for minority rights, and respect for
self, others, and property), principles, and practices
and establish a system of shared and limited
government. (Adapted from The National Standards
for Civics and Government, 1994)
Students:
• explain how the Constitutions of New York State and the
United States and the Bill of Rights are the basis for
democratic values in the United States
• understand the basic civil values that are the foundation
of American constitutional democracy
• know what the United States Constitution is and why it
is important. (Adapted from The National Standards for
Civics and Government, 1994)
• understand that the United States Constitution and the
Constitution of the State of New York are written plans
for organizing the functions of government
• understand the structure of New York State and local
governments, including executive, legislative, and
judicial branches
• identify their legislative and executive representatives at
the local, state, and national governments. (Adapted from
The National Standards for Civics and Government, 1994)

This is evident, for example, when students:
▲ create a list of basic civic values and discuss how these can best
be modeled on the personal and classroom level
▲ create a chart comparing the organization of local, state, and
federal governments
▲ given a list of local, county, state, and national leaders,
determine which are elected and which are appointed
▲ identify those branches of government responsible for making,
enforcing, and interpreting local, state, and national laws
▲ compare and contrast New York State government with the fed­
eral government by creating charts of each level
▲ simulate or role-play an activity dealing with the functions of
the branches of government
▲ create a timeline that charts events leading up to the writing of
the Declaration of Independence and the United States
Constitution.

STANDARD 5

24

Students will use a variety of intellectual skills to demonstrate their understanding of the
necessity for establishing governments; the governmental system of the U.S. and other
nations; the U.S. Constitution; the basic civic values of American constitutional democracy;
and the roles, rights, and responsibilities of citizenship, including avenues of participation.
Elementary

3. Central to civics and citizenship is an
understanding of the roles of the citizen within
American constitutional democracy and the scope of a
citizen’s rights and responsibilities.
Students:
• understand that citizenship includes an awareness of the
holidays, celebrations, and symbols of our nation
• examine what it means to be a good citizen in the
classroom, school, home, and community
• identify and describe the rules and responsibilities
students have at home, in the classroom, and at school
• examine the basic principles of the Declaration of
Independence and the Constitutions of the United States
and New York State
• understand that effective, informed citizenship is a duty
of each citizen, demonstrated by jury service, voting, and
community service
• identify basic rights that students have and those that
they will acquire as they age.

4. The study of civics and citizenship requires the
ability to probe ideas and assumptions, ask and
answer analytical questions, take a skeptical attitude
toward questionable arguments, evaluate evidence,
formulate rational conclusions, and develop and refine
participatory skills.
Students:
• show a willingness to consider other points of view
before drawing conclusions or making judgments
• participate in activities that focus on a classroom, school,
or community issue or problem
• suggest alternative solutions or courses of action to
hypothetical or historic problems
• evaluate the consequences for each alternative solution
or course of action
• prioritize the solutions based on established criteria
• propose an action plan to address the issue of how to
solve the problem.

This is evident, for example, when students:
This is evident, for example, when students:
▲ interview or survey adults in the community to identify some
ways they participate in political action, voluntary activities, or
community service
▲ draft a classroom charter, a constitution, or a set of laws that
defines a code of conduct
▲ discuss and agree on a classroom charter and compare it to the
United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child
▲ use dramatic play with puppets to investigate the consequences
of breaking a rule (e.g., a child arrives home late for dinner)
▲ make pages for a big book for each holiday
▲ understand the significance of and recite the Pledge of Allegiance
▲ discuss the colors of the American flag and make personal flags
as symbols of themselves
▲ examine the flags of other nations
▲ undertake a mock trial based on themes from classroom books.

▲ brainstorm a list of alternative solutions for a real classroom or
school problem
▲ write letters to the local paper suggesting preferred alternatives
in a local issue
▲ develop a historic walking tour of the neighborhood or
community
▲ role-play the main characters involved in an actual community
controversy, attempting to generate alternatives in their roles
▲ create a school newpaper or school-wide gallery showing student
and faculty works of art
▲ debate topics important to students
▲ hold a mock trial including witnesses, attorneys, jurors and a
judge.

STANDARD 5

25

Standard 5—Civics, Citizenship, and
Government
Intermediate

1. The study of civics, citizenship, and government
involves learning about political systems; the purposes
of government and civic life; and the differing
assumptions held by people across time and place
regarding power, authority, governance, and law.
(Adapted from The National Standards for Civics and
Government, 1994)
Students:
• analyze how the values of a nation affect the guarantee
of human rights and make provisions for human needs
• consider the nature and evolution of constitutional
democracies
• explore the rights of citizens in other parts of the
hemisphere and determine how they are similar to and
different from the rights of American citizens
• analyze the sources of a nation’s values as embodied in
its constitution, statutes, and important court cases.

This is evident, for example, when students:
▲ using computer databases or the public library, locate
constitutions from other nations and compare the rights
provided by these constitutions with those found in the Bill of
Rights and other amendments of the United States Constitution
▲ discuss reasons why all citizens should be concerned with issues
that relate to people in other countries.
▲ create a play about a society without any government and
without rules. Would students like to live in such a society?
▲ research the organization and goals of the United Nations,
explaining how they represent an international agency which is
based on democratic principles
▲ identify and explain how men and women, through their lives,
writings, and work helped to strengthen democracy in the
United States and throughout the world (Adapted from The
National Standards for Civics and Government, 1994)
▲ discuss and explore governance and citizenship, focusing on why
and how people make and change rules and laws.

Key ideas are identified by numbers (1).
Performance indicators are identified by bullets (•).
Sample tasks are identified by triangles (▲).

26

2. The state and federal governments established by
the Constitutions of the United States and the State of
New York embody basic civic values (such as justice,
honesty, self-discipline, due process, equality, majority
rule with respect for minority rights, and respect for
self, others, and property), principles, and practices
and establish a system of shared and limited
government. (Adapted from The National Standards
for Civics and Government, 1994)
Students:
• understand how civic values reflected in United States
and New York State Constitutions have been
implemented through laws and practices
• understand that the New York State Constitution, along
with a number of other documents, served as a model for
the development of the United States Constitution
• compare and contrast the development and evolution of
the constitutions of the United States and New York
State
• define federalism and describe the powers granted the
the national and state governments by the United States
Constitution
• value the principles, ideals, and core values of the
American democratic system based upon the premises of
human dignity, liberty, justice, and equality
• understand how the United States and New York State
Constitutions support majority rule but also protect the
rights of the minority.

This is evident, for example, when students:
▲ create a list of basic civic values and explore how these values
are reflected in key United States Supreme Court decisions
▲ explore laws dealing with the rights and responsibilities of
young people to determine the underlying values on which these
young people’s rights are based
▲ examine core values supporting our system of justice and
compare these values to those of other nations
▲ consider examples from the history of the United States which
show the changing nature of federalism, separation of powers,
protection of individual rights, and the amendment process
▲ working in small groups, examine a copy of the original New
York State Constitution and a copy of the present State
constitution and identify changes that have been made and
discuss possible reasons for the changes
▲ analyze an excerpt written by Alexander Hamilton, John Jay, or
James Madison dealing with federalism. Explain the positions
each take
▲ analyze key Supreme Court cases to determine how they
embody constitutional values; apply these values to real life
situations.

STANDARD 5

Students will use a variety of intellectual skills to demonstrate their understanding of the
necessity for establishing governments; the governmental system of the U.S. and other
nations; the U.S. Constitution; the basic civic values of American constitutional democracy;
and the roles, rights, and responsibilities of citizenship, including avenues of participation.
Intermediate

3. Central to civics and citizenship is an
understanding of the roles of the citizen within
American constitutional democracy and the scope of a
citizen’s rights and responsibilities.
Students:
• explain what citizenship means in a democratic society,
how citizenship is defined in the Constitution and other
laws of the land, and how the definition of citizenship
has changed in the United States and New York State
over time
• understand that the American legal and political systems
guarantee and protect the rights of citizens and assume
that citizens will hold and exercise certain civic values
and fulfill certain civic responsibilities
• discuss the role of an informed citizen in today’s
changing world
• explain how Americans are citizens of their states and of
the United States.

This is evident, for example, when students:
▲ define the concepts of rights and responsibilities of citizens
▲ investigate the ways a person can become a citizen and the ways
in which the rights of citizenship can be lost
▲ compare and contrast historic documents such as the Seneca
Falls “Declaration of Sentiments” (1848) and the Declaration of
Independence (1776)
▲ analyze a collection of cartoons that address the roles of citizens
▲ investigate historic examples of citizenship in action and create
a scale showing the gradations from minimal to basic (voting,
jury duty, voluntary activities) to more complex responsibilities
(organizing a reform movement)
▲ examine the role of the average citizen in critical American
events, such as the American Revolution, abolitionism,
Progressive reforms, support for and protest of American wars,
key political campaigns, environmental reforms, and anti-tax
protests.

4. The study of civics and citizenship requires the
ability to probe ideas and assumptions, ask and
answer analytical questions, take a skeptical attitude
toward questionable arguments, evaluate evidence,
formulate rational conclusions, and develop and refine
participatory skills.
Students:
• respect the rights of others in discussions and classroom
debates regardless of whether or not one agrees with
their viewpoint
• explain the role that civility plays in promoting effective
citizenship in preserving democracy
• participate in negotiation and compromise to resolve
classroom, school, and community disagreements and
problems.

This is evident, for example, when students:
▲ use value-based dilemmas to provide students with open-ended
situations (e.g., witnessing a crime, serving on a jury in a
murder trial) that could force them to evaluate their feelings
concerning the difficult responsibilities of citizenship
▲ discuss the options open to people who disagree with a
particular political solution to an issue
▲ conduct mock local, state, and national elections, compare the
school’s results with the real outcome of the election
▲ analyze how complex issues can be addressed when individuals
are willing to try to come to agreement through negotiation and
compromise (Adapted from The National Standards for Civics
and Government, 1994)
▲ describe how citizens can participate in governmental decisions
and how they can monitor and influence their actions and
policies
▲ using historic and current issues or incidents and actual
Supreme Court decisions hold mini model trials, appellate
arguments, or debates to enhance citizenship skills and
knowledge.

STANDARD 5

27

Standard 5—Civics, Citizenship, and
Government
Commencement

1. The study of civics, citizenship, and government
involves learning about political systems; the purposes
of government and civic life; and the differing
assumptions held by people across time and place
regarding power, authority, governance, and law.
(Adapted from The National Standards for Civics and
Government, 1994)
Students:
• analyze how the values of a nation and international
organizations affect the guarantee of human rights and
make provisions for human needs
• consider the nature and evolution of constitutional
democracies throughout the world
• compare various political systems with that of the United
States in terms of ideology, structure, function,
institutions, decision-making processes, citizenship roles,
and political culture
• identify and analyze advantages and disadvantages of
various governmental systems.

This is evident, for example, when students:
▲ analyze excerpts from the writings of Hobbes, Locke, Rousseau,
and others of the Enlightenment Period
▲ explain what the term “social contract” means and how it was
applied to the establishment of civil society and legitimate
government in many areas of the world
▲ compare various political systems throughout the world with
that of the United States in terms of their ideologies, structures,
functions, institutions, decision-making processes, citizenship
roles, and political cultures. (Adapted from Curriculum
Standards for the Social Studies, NCSS)
▲ compare and contrast the American federal system with that of
other democratic nations.

2. The state and federal governments established by
the Constitutions of the United States and the State of
New York embody basic civic values (such as justice,
honesty, self-discipline, due process, equality, majority
rule with respect for minority rights, and respect for
self, others, and property), principles, and practices
and establish a system of shared and limited
government. (Adapted from The National Standards
for Civics and Government, 1994)
Students:
• trace the evolution of American values, beliefs, and
institutions
• analyze the disparities between civic values expressed in
the United States Constitution and the United Nation
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the realities
as evidenced in the political, social, and economic life in
the United States and throughout the world
• identify, respect, and model those core civic values
inherent in our founding documents that have been
forces for unity in American society
• compare and contrast the Constitutions of the United
States and New York State
• understand the dynamic relationship between federalism
and state’s rights.

This is evident, for example, when students:
▲ analyze how core American civic values are expressed in those
documents that provide the basis for our democratic form of
government, including the Magna Carta, the Mayflower
Compact, the Declaration of Independence, the Articles of
Confederation, the Albany Plan of Union, the Federalist papers,
the Constitution, the Bill of Rights, and other amendments
▲ using the Declaration of Independence, find evidence of the
influence of Locke and other Enlightenment philosophers on a
political leader like Thomas Jefferson
▲ analyze key Supreme Court decisions (e.g., Marbury v. Madison,

McCulloch v. Maryland, Dred Scott v. Sanford, Plessy v.
Ferguson, Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, Miranda v.
Arizona, and Roe v. Wade) in terms of the ongoing struggle to
realize democratic ideals; explore how these decisions embody
constitutional civic values and the evolution and application of
constitutional values within American political, economic, and
social life
▲ present dramatic readings of key excerpts from speeches and
writings of Daniel Webster, John C. Calhoun, Henry David
Thoreau, Frederick Douglass, and Abraham Lincoln
▲ analyze the United States Constitution, the United Nations
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, United Nations
Convention on the Rights of the Child, the Charter of Amnesty
International, and other civil/human rights documents to
identify and explain the significance of the fundamental values
and principles which they espouse.
Key ideas are identified by numbers (1).
Performance indicators are identified by bullets (•).
Sample tasks are identified by triangles (▲).

28

STANDARD 5

Students will use a variety of intellectual skills to demonstrate their understanding of the
necessity for establishing governments; the governmental system of the U.S. and other
nations; the U.S. Constitution; the basic civic values of American constitutional democracy;
and the roles, rights, and responsibilities of citizenship, including avenues of participation.
Commencement

3. Central to civics and citizenship is an
understanding of the roles of the citizen within
American constitutional democracy and the scope of a
citizen’s rights and responsibilities.
Students:
• understand how citizenship includes the exercise of
certain personal responsibilities, including voting,
considering the rights and interests of others, behaving
in a civil manner, and accepting responsibility for the
consequences of one’s actions (Adapted from The
National Standards for Civics and Government, 1994)
• analyze issues at the local, state, and national levels and
prescribe responses that promote the public interest or
general welfare, such as planning and carrying out a
voter registration campaign
• describe how citizenship is defined by the Constitution
and important laws
• explore how citizens influence public policy in a
representative democracy.

This is evident, for example, when students:
▲ compare basic British political documents with the United
States Constitution, identifying how each system defines
leadership, a citizen’s rights and responsibilities, and powers of
the government
▲ outline how one can become a citizen and analyze the rights and
responsibilities of citizenship
▲ plan and implement a voter registration campaign or other
voluntary activity in the community
▲ implement a student court to adjudicate in-school offenses
▲ volunteer and support conflict mediation programs within the
school
▲ investigate local environmental issues and propose solutions
based on state and federal environmental laws.

4. The study of civics and citizenship requires the
ability to probe ideas and assumptions, ask and
answer analytical questions, take a skeptical attitude
toward questionable arguments, evaluate evidence,
formulate rational conclusions, and develop and refine
participatory skills.
Students:
• participate as informed citizens in the political justice
system and processes of the United States, including
voting
• evaluate, take, and defend positions on what the
fundamental values and principles of American political
life are and their importance to the maintenance of
constitutional democracy (Adapted from The National
Standards for Civics and Government, 1994)
• take, defend, and evaluate positions about attitudes that
facilitate thoughtful and effective participation in public
affairs
• consider the need to respect the rights of others, to
respect others’ points of view (Adapted from The
National Standards for Civics and Government, 1996)
• participate in school/classroom/community activities that
focus on an issue or problem
• prepare a plan of action that defines an issue or problem,
suggests alternative solutions or courses of action,
evaluates the consequences for each alternative solution
or course of action, prioritizes the solutions based on
established criteria, and proposes an action plan to
address the issue or to resolve the problem
• explain how democratic principles have been used in
resolving an issue or problem.

This is evident, for example, when students:
▲ use trade books to sharpen critical thinking skills to analyze
issues of citizenship when defending a stance on controversial
issues
▲ analyze issues at the local, state, national, and international
levels and prescribe responses that promote the public interest
of general welfare, such as planning and carrying out a voter
registration campaign
▲ select a state, regional, national, or international environmental
problem or issue. Propose several alternative solutions to the
problem. Assess the ethical implications as well as the
comparative costs and benefits for each alternative approach to
resolving the issue or problem. Defend a solution
▲ participate in a voter registration campaign
▲ study current international disputes and apply principles of
international law in formulating a proposed course of action
▲ critically analyze historic Supreme Court cases to determine
how well they reflect the intent and spirit of the Constitution
then and now.

STANDARD 5

29

